## What is this book about? (Rules of Analytical Reading)
1. Classify the book according to kind and subject matter. 
	- Science. How farming works. How we feed the world.
2. State what the whole book is about with the utmost brevity. 
3. Enumerate its major parts in their order and relation, and outline these parts as you have outlined the whole. 
4. Define the problem or problems the author is trying to solve.

## Introduction
- ### Notes
	- So should you be worried about the global food system? Do you live in a place that will be blighted by famine in the coming decades? Is society going to collapse? The short answer is: probably not. A fuller answer, which draws on the history of food production and the latest scientific understanding, explaining some key biophysical factors like photosynthetic efficiency and nutrient needs, is longer—about the length of this book.
	- If you are looking for a text about stunningly disruptive innovations that will soon revolutionize the food system, this is not that book. This is the opposite: it argues for the power of incremental changes, the sorts of things often ignored by the media and writers of popular non-fiction, who instead focus on the unrealistic.
	- The book’s first half is devoted to the biophysical basics of growing food. In the second half I quantify the real scope of the global food system, explain dietary necessities, and cast a critical eye over some recent suggestions for radical transformation of this system.
	- Deliberately, this book is not intended as a comprehensive review of modern food production and nutrition, but as a focused, strongly quantitative evaluation of the basics. Many books about agriculture and food do not contain many numbers, but this book is teeming with them. I am unapologetic about this. Numbers are the antidote to wishful thinking and are the only way to get a solid grasp of the modalities and limits of modern crop cultivation, food, and nutrition. With this foundation it is far less likely you will make incorrect interpretations or misunderstand the basic realities of food, nor will you accept uncritically the many exaggerated claims and unrealistic promises regarding the future of global farming.

## Chapter 1: What Did Agriculture  Ever Do For Us?
- ### Notes
	- But an omnivorous diet high in fruits limits the number of individuals in a group (and hence their maximum density within an exploited area) because there are only so many fruit trees to harvest, most of them produce only one or two crops a year, and other species compete for this limited production. Some forested environments can support an average of 1.5 chimpanzees per square kilometer, or up to two or even four individuals in the best fruit-providing areas, while in open, and often degraded and arid, savannah environments, typical densities are less than one individual per 2 square kilometers.[ 4] Living off wild fruits and the small animals that you and your family have captured and killed is clearly impossible in today’s high-density urban environment.
	- When average body weights are considered (an adult human woman is 55 kilograms, an adult chimpanzee female is 35 kilograms), the density range of human foragers has a remarkably close (but not surprising) overlap with the density range of chimpanzees: on average, environments would have been able to nourish between 5 and 50 kilograms of live body mass per square kilometer. The lowest population densities of land-based foragers were among sub-Arctic and other high-latitude groups, as well as in dry savannah environments, but there was a relatively wide range of population densities even in more hospitable circumstances, for example in seasonally dry Mediterranean climates and in tropical rainforests. These limited density ranges show clear limits to gathering and hunting in terms of the energy that could be harvested, be it by primate quadrupeds or by bipedal humans;
	- I do not want to imply that the origins of crop and animal domestication can be explained simply and completely as an induced innovation, i.e. an inevitable and gradual response to rising population levels, and that the initial successes of this process enabled and directly reinforced its later expansion and intensification. This book favors facts over convenient narratives.
	- Furthermore, this new way of getting food meant surpluses at certain times of the year and the ability to store it for the future. For example, grain in dry regions had naturally low water content and could be kept in suitable containers until the next harvest. This made it even easier for agricultural populations to reach sizes far beyond those attainable by isolated foraging groups. Crop cultivation could support a hundred times as many people per unit of land, even in some of the earliest of such societies. The rate during Egypt’s Old Kingdom (2,700–2,200 BCE) was about 1.3 people per hectare of farmland (that is, 130 people per square kilometer of cultivated land), and it had at least doubled by Roman times.[
## Chapter 2: Why Do We Eat Lots of Some Plants and Not Others?
- ### Notes
	- That would mean munching through some 20 small cauliflowers or eating about 50 apples every day! In contrast, that energy need can be covered by no more than 640 grams of whole grains—that is, about 3.5 measuring cups of rice or just over 5 cups of wheat flour. But that amount of grain would not deliver enough protein (only about 40 percent of what is needed) and less than half of the needed fats.[ 22] Recall that modern dietary recommendations specify that 45–65 percent of adult food energy should come from carbohydrates, 20–35 percent from fats, and 10–35 percent from proteins. Eating only wheat or rice could not come close to the two latter needs. This is where leguminous grains made the difference: the universal combination of cereals and legumes has been by far the most remarkable feature of crop domestication, shared by all major ancient civilizations in Europe, most of Asia, and large parts of Africa and the Americas, and preserved throughout the subsequent millennia. But it was only in the 19th century that we understood its biochemical foundation.
	- 
## Chapter 3: The Limits of What We Can Grow
## Chapter 4: Why Do We Eat Some Animals and Not Others?
## Chapter 5: What's More Important: Food or Smartphones?
## Chapter 6: What Should You Eat to Be Healthy?
## Chapter 7: Feeding a Growing Population with Reduced Environmental Impacts: Dubious Solutions
## Chapter 8: Feeding a Growing Population: What Would Work


