# Highlights — The Great Debate

Kindle highlights and personal notes from *The Great Debate: Edmund Burke, Thomas Paine, and the Birth of Right and Left* by Yuval Levin.

## Preface

> The way they divide us, after all, is hardly arbitrary. It is not by coincidence that people who tend to agree with one another on one set of issues (say, how to deal with the deficit) often also agree on others (like how to reform American education) that do not seem obviously connected. There are exceptions, to be sure, but conservatives and liberals—and therefore often Republicans and Democrats—fairly consistently find themselves on opposite sides of contentious debates on a very broad range of subjects, from economic policy to social policy to the environment, the culture, and countless other public questions. The political right and left often seem to represent genuinely distinct points of view, and our national life seems almost by design to bring to the surface questions that divide them. I have long been intrigued by the sources and nature of those distinct points of view. And since the thick of the fight is not always the best vantage point for understanding what moves our politics, the search for some answers at one point took me away from Washington for a time, to pursue a Ph.D. in political philosophy at the University of Chicago. In studying the work of the West's great political thinkers, I became persuaded that the complicated policy debates that take place on the surface of our politics are moved not just by partisan passions or economic interests but by deeper questions that, perhaps ironically, can be much more accessible to average citizens. These debates pose moral and philosophical questions regarding what each of us takes to be true and important about human life and how this influences our expectations of politics. We may not think about these deeper questions explicitly every time we approach a contemporary political issue, but how we answer such questions shapes the great political debates of our day.

> The historical and the philosophical in this case intersect not in the abstract but in the real lives of two people whose thoughts and actions helped define the right and the left at their origins. This book tells the stories of their lives and times and carefully considers their ideas and arguments. Edmund Burke and Thomas Paine lived in an era defined by a seemingly interminable succession of intense political crises, and both men were deeply involved in a great many of them both as thinkers and as actors. In the process, each laid out a vision of the world and especially a way of thinking about political change. In some important ways, Burke and Paine laid out the beginnings of the right and the left, respectively. The implicit and often explicit debate between them therefore offers us a glimpse into the origins of our political divisions. This book is thus a case study in how ideas move history and in where some of the key ideas that have moved, and still move, our history came from.

## One: Two Lives in the Arena

> His Irish upbringing and education also left Burke with a deep love of language, the written word in particular. Upon graduation from Trinity, he left for London, ostensibly to study law at his father's urging, though he abandoned his legal studies in short order to pursue his dream of joining the ranks of the great city's intellectuals by becoming a writer on large public questions. London was a hotbed of philosophical and political debates, most often carried on through pamphlets—lengthy opinion essays (most of which would today qualify as short books), published and sold very cheaply, often answering one another and seeking to ground in deeper principles an immediate question of policy. These pamphlets would swiftly make the rounds of London's burgeoning café culture and made for an exhilarating atmosphere of tense engagement with philosophy and politics.

*Note: Sounds like substack*

> Burke argues that human nature relies on emotional, not only rational, edification and instruction—an idea that would become crucial to his insistence that government must function in accordance with the forms and traditions of a society's life and not only abstract principles of justice. "The influence of reason in producing our passions is nothing near so extensive as it is commonly believed," Burke writes. We are moved by more than logic, and so politics must answer to more than cold arguments.

*Note: T-F distinction. What people FEEL matters.*

> Burke argued that political parties were not, as many people insisted, factions each contending for its own particular advantage, but rather were bodies of men each united by a vision of the common good of the whole nation. Partisanship, he insisted, was not only unavoidable but also beneficial, as it helped to organize politics into camps defined by different priorities about what was best for the country.

> Burke approached the American crisis, which heated to a boil in the mid-1770s, with this mix of inclinations toward preservation and reform. As he saw it, the Tory administration of Lord North had acted imprudently in trying to pay Britain's war debts by levying new taxes on the Americans without consulting them. People who argued about whether Parliament had the right to tax the American colonies—the question essentially everyone on both sides of the debate took up—were focused on the wrong subject. Parliament certainly had that right, Burke suggested, because its legal prerogative to govern the empire was unquestionable. But having that right did not mean Parliament had to exercise it or that the government was wise to do so. The government of human beings, he argued, is a matter not of applying cold rules and principles, but of tending to warm sentiments and attachments to produce the strongest and best unified community possible.

> "Politics ought to be adjusted not to human reasonings but to human nature, of which the reason is but a part, and by no means the greatest part," Burke said.

## Two: Nature and History

> What does Paine see when he looks past history to our natural beginnings? The very method of searching after the natural human condition in this way suggests to Paine one inescapable fact about man first and foremost: At his origin, man is an individual. And because he has no social relations to start with, he is burdened by no social distinctions and therefore is equal to all other men. Social hierarchies have no natural foundation:

> Paine considers the original society a function of human nature, while government is an artifice created by human will and therefore subject to imperfect judgment and especially to corruption by power and greed.

> As Paine defines it, then, society is a function of nature, while government is a product of art. But the purposes of government are defined by man's natural rights and natural limits, so although men create government, they must create it with the facts of nature in mind, and in such a way as to protect each man's natural prerogatives and rights and to secure the natural freedom and best interest of all. The science of government, therefore, begins from a knowledge of nature through reason, and government can be judged by how effectively it respects man's individual freedom and equality.

> Paine thus consistently asserts the supremacy of nature (understood in terms of principles accessible to reason) over history (understood as a catalog of human failures to apply the proper principles to politics). The facts that nature teaches us about human beings explain why society came to be, and the natural imperfection of human beings explains why legitimate government is necessary, while the existence of illegitimate government explains why wars, poverty, and endless other troubles have occurred. The solution is to replace illegitimate governments with ones more in line with the emerging understanding of man's nature and thereby to advance the cause of natural peace. And the end of a political revolution, properly understood, is a return to natural society with this purpose in mind. The great bulk of Paine's political ideas begin from these reflections on nature and pursue their implications.

> Paine's idea of revolution, therefore, seems to Burke a recipe for societal suicide, because it relies on the presumption—which Burke takes to be false—that by the nature of things, the society will persist when its regime has been dissolved. In the wake of such a dissolution, Burke argues, there will be no rules or methods by which a new regime could form: no protections of property or persons, no reason to follow a leader or adhere to majority rule, no means for "regenerating."

*Note: Both are right I think. Paine makes a great point that you can look to society's original state to see what rights a human should have. Burke is also right to say that original state is dangerous and lawless. There's nothing stopping someone from coming and violating your innate rights.*

> The Enlightenment philosophers, Burke worries, "are so taken up with their theories about the rights of man, that they have totally forgotten his nature." Burke is fairly specific as to what they miss about that nature: the part that is not simply matter in motion or reason in action. A politics oriented to man's nature understands man as an animal being, a rational being, and a creature of sympathies and sentiments. Paine and other radical liberal thinkers leave the human sentiments and the role of the imagination out of their understanding of human nature. By overemphasizing both the animal and the rational elements of man, Burke worries, they not only disregard but also undermine the sentiments that are in fact key to human nature and political order. The revolutionaries imagined that man was basically a rational animal, so that if his simple needs (for food and safety) were met, his reason would govern him. Those he disagreed with, including Paine, did not of course deny that there were other parts to human nature, but Burke believed they had far too much faith in the ability of reason alone to govern those other elements—and especially the passions and sentiments.

> As Burke's contemporary William Hazlitt put it: "[Burke] knew that man had affections and passions and powers of imagination, as well as hunger and thirst and the sense of heat and cold. . . . He knew that the rules that form the basis of private morality are not founded in reason, that is, in the abstract properties of those things which are the subjects of them, but in the nature of man, and his capacity of being affected by certain things from habit, from imagination, and sentiment, as well as from reason."

*Note: Filed under emotional contagion*

> Paine's critique was even more severe, accusing Burke of sketching "tragic paintings" for his readers to mask the horrors committed by the old regime in France and describing him as a kind of quixotic knight chasing windmills in search of a lost age of chivalry. And in a sense, this critique is more accurate than Francis's. As Burke made clear in his response to Francis, the notion that a thousand swords should have leaped to protect the queen was not a reflection on the queen's character. It reflected on the character of those who lived under a chivalrous system and who would not let a woman be mistreated. Men should be so cultured that their natural reaction of pity and reverence is allowed to govern their actions, rather than being replaced by a sophisticated cynicism. A political system that gives up on the effort to educate man's natural sentiments to good ends would quickly degenerate into despotism, because it would have no hold on its people's allegiance except the threat of force.

> Burke, however, is not arguing for static adherence to past practices. On the contrary, he believes that contending with constant change is one of the greatest strengths of the natural world, in ways that human communities would do well to learn from. "We must all obey the great law of change," Burke writes. "It is the most powerful law of nature, and the means perhaps of its conservation. All we can do, and that human wisdom can do, is to provide that the change shall proceed by insensible degrees. This has all the benefits which may be in change, without any of the inconveniences of mutation." And this is achieved by investing people in the given world, on the model of nature. For Burke, therefore, nature offers not a source of principles and axioms, but a living model of change, and one especially well suited to human nature, with its reliance on imagination and the sentiments, and to the natural facts of man's life and death.

## Three: Justice and Order

> Burke writes of citizens living under an established church, "they will be better able to extirpate out of the minds of all magistrates, civil, ecclesiastical, or military, any thing that bears the least resemblance to a proud and lawless domination." Moreover, religion, by "consecrating" the state, gives the people an added impetus to respect and regard their regime. Religion, and especially an established church, helps to give people the kind of sentimental attachments and peaceful habits necessary to sustain a political order grounded in generational continuity and prescription. Covering the state in sacred garb also helps to shield its origins and protect it from rash and extreme reform or revolution. And finally, religion also helps the poor deal with their condition. To deprive them of this source of consolation is to make oneself "the cruel oppressor, the merciless enemy of the poor and wretched."

> That well-functioning societies approach the standard of justice over time does not mean that all societies will gravitate toward the same institutions and forms, however. Precisely because we can never access it directly and in full, there are many ways to approach the standard of justice by degrees. "Liberty inheres in some sensible object," Burke writes, "and every nation has formed to itself some favorite point, which by way of eminence becomes the criterion of their happiness." Not only do different nations in Europe approach this ideal in different ways, but even distinct communities of Englishmen take different approaches. Burke points to the American colonists as examples. Living apart from Britain for several generations, the Americans, he says, have developed a powerful attachment to personal liberty and an insatiable entrepreneurialism, which their political institutions will inevitably reflect, while the British at home are more attached to firm and stable authority.

*Note: This is an interesting frame. The society itself is the basic unit and is inquiring into when to favor justice, etc. and each society lands on a different response.*

> Men have these abilities in differing degrees not because some are born more prudent than others but because prudence is a function of experience and education. Indeed, this case for political inequality seems motivated precisely by a belief in natural equality. "The savage hath within him the seeds of the logician, of the man of taste and breeding, the orator, the statesman, the man of virtue, and the saint," Burke writes, "which seeds, though planted in his mind by nature, yet, through want of culture, and exercise, must lie for ever buried, and be hardly perceivable by himself or others." To cultivate these seeds requires a certain type of life. Those who live it and who benefit by it are a kind of natural aristocracy, entitled to rule because they possess the requisite judgment. In an extraordinary passage in the Appeal, Burke sets forth a list of more than fifteen qualities or abilities (e.g., "To see nothing low and sordid from one's infancy"; "To be taught to despise danger in the pursuit of honor and duty"; "To have leisure to read, to reflect, to converse"; "To be a professor of high science, or of liberal and ingenuous art") that might help constitute a member of the natural aristocracy.

> Such people, of course, can be formed only under particular social conditions. And there is no shame or injustice in preferring for rule those who are better formed for making judgments, Burke argues. Societies should seek to be well governed, rather than to merely play out the implications of an abstract ideal of political equality, and to be well governed requires giving more authority to those better able to govern. Societies whose core concern is social equality not only will tend to fail to elevate the worthy, but will even tend to elevate and celebrate those most poorly qualified to govern.

*Note: This makes me think Burke and Paine are talking at different levels of abstraction. Is that where the difference comes from? Burke feels much more focused on the ins and outs of managing a nation whereas Paine seems focused on the core rights that managing should be based on.*

> For this reason, as society sustains itself through inheritance, it will sustain certain social and political inequalities, too, for its own good. And these inequalities have a crucial added benefit, beyond elevating the best qualified. They also offer means for containing and resisting abuses of power, by requiring power to flow through the deep-cut channels that compose the uneven social topography. The division of citizens into distinct groups and classes, Burke writes, "composes a strong barrier against the excesses of despotism," by establishing habits and obligations of restraint in ruler and ruled alike grounded in the relations of groups or classes in society. To remove these traditional restraints, which hold in check both the individual and the state, would mean empowering only the state to restrain the individual, and in turn restraining the state with only principles and rules, or parchment barriers. Neither, Burke thought, could be stronger or more effective than the restraints of habit and custom that grow out of group identity and loyalty. Burke's famous reference to the little platoon—"To be attached to the subdivision, to love the little platoon we belong to in society, is the first principle (the germ as it were) of public affections"—is often cited as an example of a case for local government or allegiance to place, but in its context in the Reflections, the passage is very clearly a reference to social class.

*Note: Ah ok so here Burke goes into the foundation layer*

> And yet, for all his opposition to social and political leveling, Burke does not deny the natural equality of man. It is precisely because he thinks human beings are more or less equal in natural abilities that he wants only those who have been properly formed and trained to govern. Thus, natural equality not only does not necessitate social equality (as Paine would insist it does), but also makes necessary some social inequality.

*Note: What's meant by social equality? If it means equality of outcomes yea I'm on Burke's—that's impossible.*

> Thomas Paine, of course, could hardly disagree more with Burke than he did on this point. Paine's work was the very embodiment of the radical egalitarianism that Burke feared. Paine believed that every man stands in an equal relation to his origin with every other, and therefore that none is somehow entitled to reign supreme. "Where there are not distinctions there can be no superiority," Paine writes in Common Sense. And since "all men [are] originally equals, no one by birth could have a right to set up his own family in perpetual preference to all others for ever." Because it violates the rights of every new generation, inherited social status is a recipe for an unjust society that could never be well governed.

*Note: This is a great counter point. That everyone is born equal inherently means any system of social inheritance is biasing against new generations.*

## Four: Choice and Obligation

> Society is therefore a means to accomplish what each individual has the right but not the ability to accomplish. For Paine, this means it is above all a means to enable choice, or the freedom to shape our own future uncoerced—a means to the radical liberation of the individual from the burdens of his circumstances, his given nature, and his fellow man. Equality, individualism, and natural rights (some transformed into civil rights) are descriptive and prescriptive facts regarding the human condition, but personal liberty—the right to choose—is the end toward which we aim in politics. Societies exist to protect acts of choice, by meeting animal necessities on the one hand and by protecting individuals from coercion on the other. This means that government itself, in protecting and giving effect to the rights of individuals, must be understood as a chosen arrangement defined by clear contractual rules.

> And how is this society to be led? Paine's answer—that popular sovereignty and the election of leaders are essential features of any legitimate regime—flows directly from his belief in individual choice. Hereditary government violates the rights of the governed, even if at its origin, generations ago, such a government was installed by the choice of the public. People can choose to be governed by a king with broad powers, but they cannot choose to empower that king's children and grandchildren permanently over their own. "If the present generation, or any other, are disposed to be slaves, it does not lessen the right of the succeeding generation to be free," Paine argues.

> If there is no source of authority but this moment's popular will, then no arrangements or institutions of society can be expected to remain in place one moment longer than the majority wishes them there. This, Burke argues, is not only impractical (as it would lead to a debilitating uncertainty and make it impossible for any citizen to plan his future), but also an error in principle. "Neither the few nor the many have a right to act merely by their will, in any matter connected with duty, trust, engagement, or obligation." It makes no difference if a majority chooses it or not, "as no one of us men can dispense with public or private faith, or with any other tie of moral obligation, so neither can any number of us." There are crucial instances when choice is simply not an option. And here we come to the heart of Burke's trouble with consent. While the threats to the English constitution and the risk of majority tyranny worry him, the more profound and fundamental problem, Burke argues, is that the focus on choice amounts to a fundamental misunderstanding of the human condition. A politics of choice begins in error.

> As Burke sees it, each man is in society not by choice but by birth. And the facts of his birth—the family, the station, and the nation he is born into—exert inescapable demands on him, while also granting him some privileges and protections that the newborn has, of course, done nothing to earn. Men can change their circumstances and can garner or lose privileges and obligations in the course of their lives, but even when they do so, they take on in their new stations new obligations that are not simply chosen and cannot simply be discarded at will: "The place of every man determines his duty." The most essential human obligations and relations—especially those involving the family but also many of those involving community, the nation, and one's religious faith—are not chosen and could never really be chosen, and political and social life begins from these, not from an act of will. "We have obligations to mankind at large, which are not in consequence of any special voluntary pact," Burke writes. "They arise from the relation of man to man, and the relation of man to God, which relations are not matters of choice. On the contrary, the force of all the pacts which we enter into with any particular person or number of persons amongst mankind, depends upon those prior obligations. In some cases the subordinate relations are voluntary, in others they are necessary—but the duties are all compulsive." Only by beginning one's theory of politics from a highly implausible thought experiment about perfectly independent people founding a society by choice can one imagine a society in which choice is utterly central. When one looks at how human beings actually live, it is impossible to ignore the centrality and the value of compulsory obligations.

> Perhaps the most perfectly inescapable fact about how we live is that all human beings enter a world that already exists—a world in which they belong to a particular family and community that are responsible for them and toward which they in turn have obligations. Paine's error, Burke suggests, begins with a flawed notion of original freedom and independence. In the Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs, in direct response to Paine, Burke reveals the heart of his own anthropology with an extraordinary depiction of human relations. It is quite possibly the most important paragraph in Burke's decades of writing, and so is worth quoting at length: Dark and inscrutable are the ways by which we come into the world. The instincts which give rise to this mysterious process of nature are not of our making. But out of physical causes, unknown to us, perhaps unknowable, arise moral duties, which, as we are able perfectly to comprehend, we are bound indispensably to perform. Parents may not be consenting to their moral relation; but consenting or not, they are bound to a long train of burthensome duties towards those with whom they have never made a convention of any sort. Children are not consenting to their relation, but their relation, without their actual consent, binds them to its duties; or rather it implies their consent because the presumed consent of every rational creature is in unison with the predisposed order of things. Men come in that manner into a community with the social state of their parents, endowed with all the benefits, loaded with all the duties of their situation. If the social ties and ligaments, spun out of those physical relations which are the elements of the commonwealth, in most cases begin, and always continue, independently of our will, so without any stipulation, on our part, are we bound by that relation called our country, which comprehends (as it has been well said) "all the charities of all." Nor are we left without powerful instincts to make this duty as dear and grateful to us, as it is awful and coercive.

> Human beings cannot live in society if they follow their wants and passions unrestrained, and so one of the rights of citizens is to have their passions brought under some control. Thus society guarantees some liberties and some restraints, and precisely how these are balanced is in normal times a matter of prudence, not absolute principle. The calculus of prudence aims not to maximize choice, but to meet the true wants of the people, as these emerge from the complex and layered society that Burke describes. His rights are therefore relations, not individual entitlements—they describe a person's place in the large scheme of obligations and privileges and offer the protection and benefits of that scheme and that place.

*Note: Burke's point isn't wrong I guess it's which right individuals are entitled to. And Paine can still be correct here to state that all men have certain inalienable rights: as long as those rights are a subset of the rights society entitles to the individual.*

> Burke's notion of government, Paine worries, provides no protections of liberty, because it does not define in advance the precise rights of man that no government may intrude upon and because it does not lay out the limits of government. It substitutes vague and varying notions of advantages and relations for a clear idea of the protection of every individual's freedom to choose.

*Note: This is so fundamental to how we view governments now. They must be limited. It's interesting to think when that idea was not commonplace. Also shows Paine won the argument here for now.*

> Without question, Burke's reimagining of the social contract deprives him of one great advantage of the Enlightenment-liberal contract theorists: a clear principle by which to limit the scope of government action to oppose coercion. Government, in Burke's view, is limited by the complex obligations, relations, and distinctions that compose every society. Paine seeks to flatten these distinctions but impose in their place explicit limits on the state in defense of individual liberty. Paine thinks the principles of liberty will better protect individual freedom than the institutions of society. Where Paine imposes on government the obligation to respect the freedom of action of each of its citizens, Burke imposes on government a much less exacting (if somewhat more demanding) obligation to meet the wants of the people and advance the interests of the complex social whole. Order and interest, more than individual liberty and choice, is the end of Burke's notion of government. And he thinks the nation's social topography will be a better guardian of the people's liberty in practice than a set of abstract rules, however exacting they might be.

> Finding the balance between freedom and restraint is an immensely difficult challenge, which the revolutionaries, certain of their ability to establish a regime from scratch, are too likely to ignore. "To make a government requires no great prudence," Burke writes in the Reflections. "Settle the seat of power; teach obedience; and the work is done. To give freedom is still more easy. It is not necessary to guide; it only requires to let go of the rein. But to form a free government: that is, to temper together these opposite elements of liberty and restraint in one consistent work, requires much thought, deep reflection, a sagacious, powerful, and combining mind."

*Note: It feels like Burke is trying to say "hey, we have this system let's fix it instead of throwing the baby out with the bathwater"*

> Edmund Burke begins from the given world and seeks to strengthen social and political life as a means of contending with circumstances we did not choose. Thomas Paine begins from the principles of liberty, equality, and natural rights and builds political institutions on those grounds to defend the prerogatives of the individual.

## Five: Reason and Prescription

> Burke writes, not "to gratify the schemes of visionary politicians." It runs into trouble, therefore, when statesmen "split and anatomiz[e] the doctrine of free government, as if it were an abstract question concerning metaphysical liberty and necessity and not a matter of moral prudence and natural feeling."

*Note: Another thought while reading this. Burke and Paine's debate showcases why freedom of speech and thought is so important. Both have good points and we don't as Burke says always want to change the system on a first whim. We also don't want to assume the system we have is the best system out there; sometimes we need a revolution. And a priori it's challenging to know when circumstances put us in the former or the latter. And that's why the marketplace is important! Ideas need to fight it out to see which comes on top.*

> But partisanship is not the most significant consequence of the limits of individual reason for Burke. It offers a means of organizing political activity given those limits, but it does not itself offer an alternative guide to political judgment and action. If the premises of Enlightenment liberalism are inadequate, and if the resulting faith in modern reason is unjustified, what is the alternative organizing principle of, and the appropriate means for thinking about, political change? Burke's answer draws on all that we have seen of his critique of speculative politics, his emphasis on the given, and his understanding of human nature. It is prescription—Burke's great anti-innovationist innovation. The term prescription originated in Roman property law, where it referred to ownership by virtue of long-term use, rather than by formal deed. Burke uses the term to describe the means by which practices and institutions that have long served society well are given the benefit of the doubt against innovations that might undermine them and are used as patterns and models for political life. In this way, reforms and innovations are judged by their conformity to, and continuity with, existing political forms. Burke's case for this novel concept is firmly grounded in his sense of the limits of individual reason. Generations of statesmen have dealt with the kinds of challenges the present age must face, and "if we do not take to our aid the foregone studies of men reputed intelligent and learned, we shall be always beginners." Humility before the wisdom of the past, however, does not mean just learning from the arguments that great men of prior generations made in writing and speech. Their legacy is the nation itself—its institutions, practices, and forms, all of which are "the result of the thoughts of many minds, in many ages." Prescription therefore means, above all, respecting and preserving the political order as it has been handed down and even according it reverence.

> But the essence of Burke's teaching on prescription is not directed to resistance in a crisis. Rather, prescription is above all a means of controlled and gradual modification in response to felt public needs—not to oppose all change, but rather to pursue change carefully, preferring changes to substance over changes to form where possible, and incremental over radical reform where necessary. Burke was by no means a radical traditionalist opposed to all reform. Far from it; he was a leading (in some respects the leading) reformer in Parliament in his time (see Chapter 6). But he believed that successful reform must begin from existing circumstances, not from theoretical speculations. The maxim of the English, Burke writes, is "never entirely nor at once to depart from antiquity." That does not mean no departure may be attempted, but rather means that departures must be partial and incremental—aimed at improving or correcting, not beginning anew.

> Throughout his writing Paine rejects appeals to authority and demands instead appeals to reason as a standard of judgment. He even prides himself in his own work on avoiding making points by quotation of familiar and learned authorities—a practice Burke engages in frequently. "I scarcely ever quote; the reason is, I always think," Paine writes. Even when others pointed to places in which his work clearly drew on noted authorities, Paine staunchly resisted the implication. There is certainly something odd in an obviously learned man's insisting he is not conversant with the great writers of his age and of the Western canon, but for Paine the substantive point is worth more than the biographical one: Direct reference to original principles is more important than a demonstrated grasp of precedents. The emphasis on individual and unaided reason is crucial for the case he seeks to make. He argues that every individual is capable of employing his own reason to discern the truth or falsehood of a political question, so that no reliance on the past or on collective reasoning is required. In this way, again, Paine believes that every individual has the capacity to begin from scratch, rather than beginning where others have left off.

*Note: +1. As true today as it was back then.*

> But Edmund Burke drew more or less the opposite lesson from the story of American independence. He was deeply involved in the British debate over America and was quite possibly the most prominent and vocal of the friends of America in Parliament. But Burke never attributes a philosophical character to the views and actions of the Americans. Not once in his public or known private writings on the subject does he refer to the events in America as a revolution, referring always to the American crisis, the American war, or even describing the events as a civil war. In his view, it was the English, not the Americans, who had broken with prescription in the name of merely speculative theoretical claims about government by imposing an unprecedented regime of taxation and limits on commerce in America on the premise that Parliament had an unlimited authority to govern colonial affairs directly.

*Note: This could also be construed as the Americans called out the unfound principles of their current government relationship.*

> For both Burke and Paine, the American crisis served as proof of their very different understandings of reason and political change. Paine's case for American independence is a case for a politics of Enlightenment reason and rational principle. Burke's case for American independence is a case for prudence and prescription. In championing opposing sides of the question of the French Revolution a decade later, each man made almost exactly the same case he had argued about America. Their agreement over America reflected quite different understandings of events there, while their disagreement over France reflected a general agreement over what the French revolutionaries were up to. In both cases, Burke and Paine disagreed profoundly about human nature, political change, and the proper relation of reason and politics.

> This dispute between universal principles and historical precedents—between a politics of explicit knowledge and a politics of implicit knowledge—cuts to the core of the debate that still defines our politics. To this day, progressive voices argue that our political system must empower expertise to directly address social and political problems with technical prowess. And today's conservatives argue that we must empower institutions (like families, churches, and markets) that channel the implicit knowledge of many individuals and generations and that have passed some test of time and contain in their very forms more wisdom than any person could possess. This dispute, which Burke and Paine made so explicit, is another version of the disagreement about whether political thought must consider abstract, solitary, rational individuals or must take up particular human societies in their social and historical settings. The question forms a unifying thread throughout the Burke-Paine debate. As they argue about reason, Burke and Paine disagree about the given past and its relation to the present—about whether the circumstances that greet us when we enter the world can legitimately make demands on the way we think about politics.

## Six: Revolution and Reform

> When he speaks of the British constitution in this context, Burke means the model of slowly enlarged precedent, not the model of the Lords and the Commons in particular. Reformers should build on their national traditions. The fundamental insight of his positive case for reform is that a statesman ought to begin from gratitude for what works in his society, rather than from outrage at what does not work. He must begin from a sense of what he has and what is worth preserving and from there build toward what he wants and what is worth achieving. But without question, change is not only inevitable but desirable. And without developing an effective means of change, a nation "might even risk the loss of that part of the constitution which it wished the most religiously to preserve."

## Seven: Generations and the Living

> HERE WE FIND THE TRUE BOTTOM of the Burke-Paine debate, and from here we can begin to appreciate how their differences have helped to shape our own. They disagreed about whether some basic aspects of the human condition, especially the facts that we are all born and that we all die, should decisively shape human societies. Paine's assertive, confident, rationalist, technocratic, and progressive outlook held that through the right kinds of political arrangements, man could overcome the limits that these facts might impose and he could therefore reshape his world to his preferences and even end the long-standing scourges of injustice, war, and suffering. Burke's grateful, protective, cautious, pious, gradualist, and reformist outlook held that man could only hope to improve his circumstances if he understood his own limits, built on the achievements of those who came before him to repair their errors, and realized that some profound human miseries and vices are permanent functions of our nature—and that pretending otherwise would only make them worse.

## Conclusion

> The tension between those two dispositions comes down to some very basic questions: Should our society be made to answer to the demands of stark and abstract commitments to ideals like social equality or to the patterns of its own concrete political traditions and foundations? Should the citizen's relationship to his society be defined above all by the individual right of free choice or by a web of obligations and conventions not entirely of our own choosing? Are great public problems best addressed through institutions designed to apply the explicit technical knowledge of experts or by those designed to channel the implicit social knowledge of the community? Should we see each of our society's failings as one large problem to be solved by comprehensive transformation or as a set of discrete imperfections to be addressed by building on what works tolerably well to address what does not? What authority should the character of the given world exercise over our sense of what we would like it to be?

*Note: Again the takeaway is that open debate is necessary. Which is right? We don't know until we examine the specific circumstances. Sometimes revolution is called for and sometimes it's better to prefer incremental change.*
