# Breakneck — Highlights

## Introduction

> The best hedge I know against heightening tensions between the two superpowers is mutual curiosity. The more informed Americans are about Chinese, and vice versa, the more likely we are to stay out of trouble. The starkest contrast between the two countries is the competition that will define the twenty-first century: an American elite, made up of mostly lawyers, excelling at obstruction, versus a Chinese technocratic class, made up of mostly engineers, that excels at construction. That's the big idea behind this book. It's time for a new lens to understand the two superpowers: China is an engineering state, building big at breakneck speed, in contrast to the United States' lawyerly society, blocking everything it can, good and bad.

## Chapter 1: Engineers vs. Lawyers

> Engineers go hard in one direction, and if they perceive something isn't working, they switch with no loss of speed toward another. They don't suffer criticism from humanist softies. Change in China can be so dramatic because so few voices are part of the political process. To a first approximation, the twenty-four men who make up the Political Bureau are the only people permitted to do politics. Once they've settled questions of strategy, the only remaining task is for the bureaucracy to sort out the details. But when it makes mistakes, it can drag nearly the entire population into crisis.

> Once upon a time, America, too, had the musculature of an engineering state, building mighty works throughout the country: lengthy train tracks, gorgeous bridges, beautiful cities, weapons of war with terrible power, and missions to the moon. George Washington was a general, the first of many national security types who appreciated the value of building. As a young army officer, Dwight Eisenhower spent two months driving, or, more precisely, juddering, from coast to coast on unpaved roads. As president, he built the Interstate Highway System.

*Note: This makes me think. Isn't a better framework that America built what was needed. We plucked all the low hanging fruit. Put yourselves in the mind of a settler in the 1800s or early 1900s. Why were they so focused on building? Their material needs were not met. Food, energy, materials were not in abundance. The past building made many of these things abundant! No wonder we stopped caring as much about building. It's interesting though abundance may not be optimal if it makes your culture forget how to build.*

## Chapter 2: Building Big

> It was only afterward that I started to appreciate the strangeness of what I had cycled through. I had traversed a poor region to which the engineering state has devoted tremendous resources to modernize. Guizhou had compressed the century's worth of investments that the United States had made—between the Transcontinental Railroad and the Interstate Highway System—into two decades. After cycling through Guizhou, I came to a different understanding of the term "socialism with Chinese characteristics." China does little by way of redistribution from the wealthy to the poor; rather, it is enacting a Leninist agenda in which the state retains enormous discretion to command economic resources in order to maintain political control and to build toward a post-scarcity world.

*Note: This is a really good point actually. Redistribution doesn't need to be the way the government helps the poor. The government can also help the poor with rock solid infrastructure and housing they can actually use. Maybe counter to this is the best way to help the poor is make them rich and then let them choose...*

> The Guizhou locals we chatted with were prouder of their bridges than anything else. My friends and I cycled across bridges that were set above plunging ravines. State media boasts that Guizhou has become a "museum of bridges," a few of which are trying to develop into tourism sites: The tenth-highest bridge in Guizhou (which is twenty-third globally) hosts the world's highest bungee jump. Each time the engineers build a bridge, they inevitably announce that travel times between two towns have been cut from many hours to perhaps a few minutes. That creates real convenience and connection for rural people. Some of these are bridges to nowhere, but after a few years, they become somewhere.

*Note: This again harps back to the point where all this infra is good when the country is actually poor. But what happens when the country becomes relatively rich or has built all this infra already? It's a one time improvement no?*

> The United States used to make enormous investments to modernize its poorer regions. Today, Americans rarely feel so excited for major construction projects, in part because they're associated with environmental damage, in part because they take so long to complete, and in part because they're so rare that people have forgotten how much they can improve lives.

*Note: +1 on the culture forgetting what it means to build things.*

## Chapter 3: Tech Power

> Apple and Foxconn found an advantage in Shenzhen beyond workers who could meet their quality standards: The dense network of factories also offered flexibility on manufacturing techniques. One of the former Apple engineers I spoke to pointed out that any feature changes create unpredictable demands. Each year, Apple might have a pretty good sense of where most valuable iPhone components are coming from, but there are constant surprises further down the supply chain. "There are always new components or processes that a new design requires, like a certain type of adhesive or a screw of a slightly different size." Therefore, Apple constantly had to scramble to find suppliers on short notice. "Almost always," the engineer continued, "we found someone in Shenzhen by asking a guy who knows a guy whose cousin might be able to produce a few hundred thousand new screws."

> The US manufacturing base has, with some exceptions, rusted from top to bottom. Why have so many manufacturers crumbled? Partly, I think, we can examine the culture of financial investors. Wall Street has been far keener to invest in capital-light businesses: digital platforms like social media and search engines or chip companies that focus on design rather than cumbersome fabrication facilities. If it weren't for Tesla (which makes many of its cars in Shanghai), the United States would be even further behind China in electric vehicles. And Tesla's survival was a close-run thing. In 2018, Elon Musk said that Tesla was on the verge of bankruptcy as it tried to ramp up the production of the ultimately successful Model 3. It was a time he called "excruciating." In retrospect, it is an indictment of the American financial system that fundraising for a manufacturing leader had to be this difficult.

*Note: I wonder if venture capital in some ways solves this. Really the problem is the differential between short term shareholder value and long term shareholder value. Sometimes those two are not in alignment. If you could get financiers to own company equity and commit to owning company equity for long periods of time maybe that fixes the incentive problem. And that's VC no?*

> An obsession with technology has spawned what is perhaps the most interesting online movement in China. In the heavily censored realm of the Chinese internet, where no group is allowed to be very organized, one set of intellectuals has made themselves heard. They are loosely affiliated writers who refer to themselves as the Industrial Party. Their views are simple to summarize: that nation-states ruthlessly compete with each other; that science and technology are the decisive forces in this Darwinian competition; and that therefore the state must be organized around the pursuit of science and technology.

> The reality is that the United States will never again be a bigger manufacturer than China. Its much smaller population, the higher wage and standard-of-living expectations, and the dollar's status as a global reserve currency make that harder. On a practical level, it is difficult to imagine that Americans can tolerate the work habits of people in Shenzhen or Henan: working on assembly lines for eight hours a day, eating at cafeterias at designated times, crammed six to a dorm room at night. Manufacturing workers in the Midwest like to drive their pickup trucks home.

*Note: This reminds me of a counter argument. Yes China has won this round of manufacturing but what happens when technology changes? If manufacturing becomes local and additive manufacturing is the next phase all of China's infrastructure may hold it back instead of propelling it forward.*
