# Highlights — The Wolves of K Street

## Part I: The Inside Game (1972–1999)

### Chapter 5

> Though it attracted little notice at the time, the growing role of money in politics precipitated structural changes at the heart of the Democratic Party. Coelho's first boss, Congressman Sisk, had been a tire salesman, a truck driver, a fruit picker, and a union organizer before his election. But as the cost of running for office skyrocketed from $73,000 for the average House race in 1976 to almost $500,000 two decades later, many candidates from working-class backgrounds were simply priced out of public office. At the same time, Coelho's overhaul of the DCCC accelerated an even more significant transformation: the political parties were deprioritizing voter mobilization efforts in order to devote more of their resources to fund-raising. As a result, the Democratic Party grew less responsive to the needs of its poor and working-class voters, and, increasingly, it began to reflect the values of its more affluent donors.

*Note: Bad bad bad.*

### Chapter 7

> As a first step, the partners leveraged their Rolodexes of former campaign consulting clients. They reached out to allies in the administration and made sure that neither President George H. W. Bush—a client of Atwater's—nor the new secretary of HUD, Jack Kemp—a client of Black's—would publicly announce their support for the legislation, according to a former mortgage industry lobbyist involved in the campaign. Still, there remained a problem of optics. To many Americans, the debate over the National Affordable Housing Act pitted a collection of selfless community advocates working to boost middle-class home ownership against a cartel of greedy corporations looking to pump up profits. To build support for their position, the lobbyists realized, the mortgage insurers needed a more sympathetic public face. In short order, the lobbyists established an alliance with a confrontational antipoverty group, National People's Action, which had achieved notoriety for its "hits"—or surprise rallies at the offices or homes of its opponents. The activists opposed the legislation on different grounds than the mortgage insurers did: they considered the bill an unnecessary handout to people wealthy enough to obtain mortgages without the government's assistance. "There's no reason to increase [loan] limits to appease the rich," Gale Cincotta, the famed community activist who ran National People's Action, said in a press release. "This proposal will increase foreclosures and losses to [the government], increase discrimination against lower-income borrowers, and all in the name of rich people that don't need help to afford a loan." In an effort to tank the FHA reform, the Republican lobbyists joined forces with the lefty activists, forming what the Chicago Sun-Times described as "American housing's odd couple of the decade." By teaming up with the community activists, the lobbyists were able to accomplish what they might not have been able to on their own.

*Note: The France masters*

### Chapter 8

> In addition to PAC contributions, business interests brought the tactics of modern electioneering to bear on their effort to kill universal health care. One of Patton Boggs's clients, the Health Insurance Association of America, led the way on this new approach. In the summer of 1993 the group hired one of the Republican Party's premier experts in public opinion polling, Bill McInturff, to help it achieve a more nuanced understanding of how citizens felt about health care reform. McInturff traveled the country to hear Americans' concerns firsthand, organizing intimate focus groups with small numbers of citizens in Saint Louis, Atlanta, Charlotte, North Carolina, and other cities. Through these listening sessions, McInturff discovered that many Americans didn't favor a radical reform of the health care system after all. Yes, changes were needed, but people generally liked their own health insurance plans. They did, however, have a more fundamental worry: Americans simply didn't trust the federal government to fix problems. "People wanted health care to pass, they wanted Clinton to get credit," McInturff said in The System, David Broder and Haynes Johnson's 1996 book. But "people don't believe the federal government can get anything done." When he got back to Washington, McInturff shared his findings with the association's executives. He told them that the industry's best chance of defeating the bill was to weaponize the "very powerful wave" of public distrust of the government. McInturff coached the industry's lobbyists, media strategists, and consultants to change the way they talked about the issue. Instead of calling it "national health insurance," they should refer to Clinton's reform as "government health care" as a way to stoke the public's anxieties. "Just that word change," McInturff said, "made a powerful difference."

*Note: Framing again.*

## Part II: The Outside Game (2000–2015)

### Chapter 9

> By preventing the Democratic and Republican parties from accepting huge contributions from a relatively small number of special interest groups, the law forced politicians to handle more of the grueling work of fund-raising themselves. Cut off from this ocean of campaign cash, members of Congress had to schlep from one donor event to the next, trying to hustle up modest contributions—$500 here, $1,000 there—from as many people as possible. The dynamic created a new lever of influence for savvy insiders. Lobbyists began collecting stacks of checks from their networks of clients, colleagues, and friends for up to $2,000 per donor—the legal limit at the time. They then delivered the combined fund-raising hauls—often $100,000 or more—to the political candidates. This innovation, which came to be known as "bundling," served to indebt lawmakers to the lobbyists who could gather large amounts of money for their campaigns.

> By the 2004 election, bundlers like Morris were responsible for raising one-fifth of the total amount of money collected in the 2004 presidential campaign, a share that would swell to one-third during the 2008 presidential race.

> At the same time, using an approach that had been advanced by Black Manafort in the 1980s and Tony Podesta in the 1990s, he deployed a more sophisticated influence campaign that targeted the public. Though it could be difficult for corporations to get their pet issues covered by the mainstream press, the explosion of hyper-partisan, Internet-based media made it easier for companies to slip their propaganda into the news cycle. Morris paid consultants to dig up frightening accounts of the outbreak overseas and send them to liberal or conservative web outlets that thrived on the sort of sensationalized news stories that activated readers' emotions. The goal was to stoke Americans' fears about avian flu in order to put public pressure on lawmakers, forcing them to act. Morris called this type of work, "black ops."

> And when Roche's chief medical director, Dominick Iacuzio, testified before Congress in May 2005, he pointed to the studies as evidence that Tamiflu prevented flu infections. As it turned out, though, several of the studies' coauthors had been paid by Roche in the past, an arrangement that undercut the objectivity of their findings. Had any policy makers known about the financial relationship between the drugmaker and the scientists, they might have been more skeptical about the studies and perhaps more likely to support a competing treatment from rival drug company GlaxoSmithKline. However, at no point during the process did Morris disclose that Roche had supported some of the researchers. To the lawmakers and administration officials, it seemed like independent science.

> The deal would result in more than $2 billion in Tamiflu sales to the federal government, states, and cities over the next few years. Overnight Morris became a company star. He boasted to friends that, as a reward for his effort, Roche gave him a $1 million bonus, bought him a Porsche, and sent him and his wife on an expensive vacation. In December 2005, about a year after he was hired, executives put Evan Morris in charge of its entire lobbying operations and gave him the title of executive director of federal government affairs. Around this time, Morris directed employees to create a report specifying the amount of money that Roche spent on its Washington office—and how much revenue his team produced through sales to the government. In his first year at Roche, Morris calculated that his return on investment was an astounding 1,000 percent.

### Chapter 12

> For influence peddlers, this approach offered another benefit. While efforts to lobby Congress directly must be reported publicly, there's no requirement to disclose activities designed to influence their constituents. As such, these indirect lobbying campaigns could be conducted under cover of darkness. The 2007 ethics reforms served only to reinforce this shift in tactics. When the ban on gift giving further limited the ability of lobbyists to influence lawmakers directly, K Street firms directed even more of their resources toward trying to achieve their policy objectives by shaping the opinions of voters. At the height of Evan Morris's work with Jim Courtovich, Genentech's advocacy budget had ballooned to $50 million, yet only $5 million was spent on traditional lobbying activities. The remaining $45 million was for public affairs, grassroots, polling, data analytics, and other tactics that fell outside the technical definition of lobbying. And on account of the gaps in the regulation of K Street, none of this $45 million shadow lobbying budget had to be disclosed to the public. It was here that the modern influence industry was born. To build his firm in the 1970s, Tommy Boggs had used his personal connections to directly persuade lawmakers to back the interests of his corporate clients. In the 1980s Black Manafort brought the tools they'd developed as campaign consultants to the business of lobbying. During the 1990s and 2000s, Tony Podesta was using his experience as a liberal activist to further advance the science of outside influence peddling. Now, in the wake of the post-Abramoff reforms, Morris and Courtovich were blazing a trail in the new world of shadow lobbying, where DC-based operators carry out the secret, sophisticated campaigns that target voters far beyond the Beltway, foment seemingly organic public outcries, and pressure lawmakers into taking actions that benefit their corporate clients. It was this very script that Morris had used for his Tamiflu coup, and that he and Courtovich had followed in their Avastin campaign.

## Part III: The Reckoning (2015–Present)

### Chapter 25

> Podesta gave little apparent thought, however, to the role that Washington's great lobbying dynasties had played in the rise of political extremism and the destabilization of our democracy. Back in the 1970s, Tommy Boggs had used his insider access to undercut the once-sweeping influence of unions, environmental advocates, and consumer groups while bringing corporations to power in the nation's capital. Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, the operatives at Black, Manafort & Stone deployed their experience as campaign consultants and their credibility inside the conservative movement to give rise to Fox News, introduce Donald Trump to Washington, and help reorient federal policy around a set of free-market ideals. During the late 1990s and the 2000s, Podesta used his talents for campaign finance to ensure that this CEO-friendly economic vision—of weak regulations on industry, low taxes on billionaires and businesses, and minimal trade barriers for large multinational corporations—was embedded inside the Democratic Party as well.

> Together, members of these three lobbying houses helped to tilt the playing field against ordinary Americans in all sorts of ways. Through their efforts on behalf of Big Business, they kept drug prices elevated, blocked universal health insurance, made it tougher for lower-middle-class families to access safe mortgages, and prevented the United States from taking aggressive action to combat climate change, among others. Along the way, these three influence-peddling dynasties helped bring about a fundamental transformation in the priorities of Washington—bequeathing a legacy that was far more destructive than any individual feat of lobbying. For much of the twentieth century, a ruling class of New Deal liberals had used the federal government as an instrument to protect consumers from the excesses of capitalism and to moderately redistribute wealth downward. But beginning in the late 1970s—and thanks to the influence of corporate lobbyists—lawmakers and administration officials in both political parties began pursuing a principal tenet of the conservative revolution: reducing government authority and maximizing economic efficiency. In the absence of sufficiently strong countervailing forces such as organized labor or public interest groups, which had been unable to regain strength in the face of industry opposition, this pro-business policy consensus would serve as the ballast of economic policy making in Washington for roughly forty years. And it would work, alongside other factors such as technological innovation and globalization, to widen the gap between the rich and the poor to levels not seen since the 1920s.

> The result was an economy that enabled highly educated workers in certain fields to flourish, but was often punishing for the more than 62 percent of Americans without a college degree. A political system that could respond to the desires of wealthy elites, but was dangerously disconnected from the needs of most citizens. And a society subsumed in the sort of economic inequality that fuels political polarization, breaks down social cohesion, and broadens the appeal of political extremists—ideal conditions, that is, for someone like Trump to ascend.

> The GOP's split from Big Business was driven by an array of social, political, and economic forces. For one thing, many Republican voters began blaming corporate friendly policies—like free trade and liberalized immigration—for the loss of manufacturing jobs and the decay of once-thriving rural communities. In addition, CEOs have come under intense pressure from employees, shareholders, and customers to stake out progressive social positions in order to align their firms with the younger, wealthier, and college-educated Americans whom they consider essential to future profitability. Such political activism, as corporations like Walt Disney have learned, stokes the fury of right-wing culture warriors, led by Donald Trump. At the same time, there was a third factor behind the Republican Party's rupture from the corporate establishment: campaign finance.

> During the four decades following the corporate political revolution of the 1970s, Republican lawmakers came to depend on industry PACs for a substantial portion of their reelection funds. In recent years, though, they've grown considerably less reliant on this once-essential source of cash. In the 2016 election, for instance, 128 House Republicans received more than 40 percent of their campaign funds from corporate PACs. But during the 2022 election, according to the Wall Street Journal, just forty-two did. Overall, corporate PAC contributions to Republican congressional candidates fell 27 percent, to $189 million, from 2016 to 2022. Instead, GOP lawmakers are obtaining a growing share of their campaign funds from small-dollar donations from ordinary citizens. While such independence from the corporate PAC system empowers Republicans to oppose Big Business, it makes them more reliant on a pool of individual, small-dollar donors that, according to a 2016 paper by Brigham Young University associate professor Michael Barber, tend to favor ideologically extreme candidates. The same trend is playing out on the left as well. Many Democratic lawmakers—along with a handful of Republicans—now refuse to accept any funds from corporate PACs. Democratic candidates, as a whole, are obtaining a shrinking share of their election funds from Big Business. As a result, members of Congress from both political parties have less incentive to reflexively support pro-business legislation.

> Instead, a different group—politically active millionaires and billionaires—has responded to the decision by flooding the campaign finance system with massive donations. Figures such as the petrochemical magnate Charles Koch and libertarian venture capitalist Peter Thiel. Seventeen of the top twenty donors to the GOP's Senate Leadership Fund in 2022, for example, were conservative billionaires or small privately held companies. In contrast, corporate America's marquee advocacy group, the US Chamber of Commerce, ranked number twenty on the list of top donors. On the Democratic side, the contrast was even more stark. No publicly traded company ranked among the top twenty donors to the election of Senate Democrats.

> Rather than widening the influence of Big Business in Washington, the Citizens United decision has diminished the role of corporations in the campaign finance system—all while elevating another set of financial benefactors, activist billionaires, whose political agendas are often more extreme than the corporate establishment.

> Regardless of whether it leads to a revival of union power or not, the ungluing of the pro-business consensus has already ushered in a period of change and uncertainty for Washington's lobbying industry. Yet adapting to change is nothing new for corporate influence peddlers. Indeed, the history of K Street is one of continued evolution and persistent ingenuity. When old-fashioned shoe leather lobbying became less effective, operatives pioneered new tools to influence lawmakers through their constituents back home in their districts. When lawmakers banned corporations from sending six-figure checks to political parties, lobbyists discovered how to collect bundles of $1,000 and $2,000 checks and deliver them to members of Congress. When Washington enacted new lobbying disclosure requirements in the wake of the Jack Abramoff scandals, many DC insiders simply deregistered as lobbyists and became "shadow lobbyists." No matter what new obstacles have emerged, K Street has always managed to invent new ways to exercise its power over Washington. Our current moment is no different. The unwinding of the pro-business consensus won't doom Washington lobbyists. It will simply force them to innovate once again: to develop new alliances, tools, and tactics to advance their agenda in a changing capital city. It will also, of course, require new people. A new set of power brokers and lobbying dynasties to define a new era. New fortunes to be made, new rules to be broken. New stories to be told.
