# Read Write Own — Highlights

## Introduction

> The internet is probably the most important invention of the twentieth century. It transformed the world much as earlier technological revolutions—the printing press, the steam engine, electricity—did before. Unlike many other inventions, the internet wasn't immediately monetized. Its early architects created the network not as a centralized organization but as an open platform that anyone—artists, users, developers, companies, and others—could access equally. At a relatively low cost and without needing approval, anyone anywhere could create and share code, art, writing, music, games, websites, startups, or whatever else could be dreamed up. And whatever you created, you owned. As long as you obeyed the law, no one could change the rules on you, extract more money from you, or take away what you built. The internet was designed to be permissionless and democratically governed, as were its original networks, email and the web. No participants would be privileged over others. Anyone could build on top of these networks and control their creative and economic destinies. This freedom and sense of ownership led to a golden period of creativity and innovation that drove the growth of the internet through the 1990s and 2000s, leading to countless applications that have transformed our world and the way we live, work, and play. And then everything changed. Starting in the mid-2000s, a small group of big companies wrenched control away. Today the top 1 percent of social networks account for 95 percent of social web traffic and 86 percent of social mobile app use. The top 1 percent of search engines account for 97 percent of search traffic, and the top 1 percent of e-commerce sites account for 57 percent of e-commerce traffic. Outside of China, Apple and Google account for more than 95 percent of the mobile app store market. In the past decade, the five biggest tech companies grew from about 25 percent to nearly 50 percent of the market capitalization of the Nasdaq-100. Startups and creative people increasingly depend on networks run by megacorporations like Alphabet (parent of Google and YouTube), Amazon, Apple, Meta (parent of Facebook and Instagram), and Twitter (rebranded as X) to find customers, build audiences, and connect with peers. The internet got intermediated, in other words. The network went from permissionless to permissioned.

> The good news is that billions of people got access to amazing technologies, many of which were free to use. The bad news is that for those same billions, a centralized internet run by a handful of mostly ad-based services meant fewer software choices, weakened data privacy, and diminished control over their online lives. And it became much harder for startups, creators, and other groups to grow their internet presences without worrying about centralized platforms changing the rules on them and taking away their audiences, profits, and power.

> The negative effects of these design choices are threefold: (1) they stifle innovation; (2) they tax creativity; and (3) they concentrate power and money in the hands of a few. This is especially dangerous when you consider that the killer app of the internet is networks. Most of what people do online involves networks: The web and email are networks. Social apps like Instagram, TikTok, and Twitter are networks. Payment apps like PayPal and Venmo are networks. Marketplaces like Airbnb and Uber are networks. Almost every useful online service is a network.

> The problem stems from permission. Today creators and startups need to ask for permission from centralized gatekeepers and incumbents to launch and grow new products. In business, permission seeking is not like asking your parents or teachers for permission, where you get a simple yes or no answer. Nor is it like traffic lights setting the rules of the road. In business, permission becomes a pretense for tyranny. Dominant tech businesses leverage the power of permission to thwart competition, desolate markets, and extract rents.

> That's what's happening today. Just as the internet seemed to be consolidating beyond repair, a new software movement emerged that can reimagine the internet. The movement has the potential to bring back the spirit of the early internet, secure property rights for creators, reclaim user ownership and control, and break the stranglehold Big Tech has on our lives. That's why I believe there's a better way and that these are still the early days. The internet can still fulfill the promise of its original vision. Entrepreneurs, technologists, creators, and users can make it happen. The dream of an open network that fosters creativity and entrepreneurship doesn't have to die.

> A better description is that blockchains are a new class of computer, one you can't put in your pocket or on your desk, as you might with a smartphone or laptop. Nevertheless, blockchains fit the classic definition of computers. They store information and run rules encoded in software that can manipulate that information.

> Blockchains invert the hardware-software power relationship, like the internet before them. With blockchains, the software governs a network of hardware devices. The software—in all its expressive glory—is in charge. Why does this matter? Because blockchains are computers that can, for the first time ever, establish inviolable rules in software. This allows blockchains to make strong, software-enforced commitments to users. A pivotal commitment involves digital ownership, which places economic and governance power in the hands of users. You may still be wondering, So what? What problems do blockchains solve? The ability for blockchains to make strong commitments about how they will behave in the future allows new networks to be created.

> Blockchain networks combine the societal benefits of protocol networks with the competitive advantages of corporate networks. Software developers get open access, creators get direct relationships with their audiences, fees are guaranteed to stay low, and users get valuable economic and governance rights. At the same time, blockchain networks have the technical and financial capabilities to compete with corporate networks. Blockchain networks are a new construction material for building a better internet.

*Note: He could back up this argument more*

> This book aims to give you an appreciation for the essence of blockchains, the technology—that is, the computer—and all the exciting new things it can do. My hope is that you will, along the way, come to understand exactly what problems blockchains solve and why the solutions they present are so urgently needed.

> I believe to understand the internet's future, you must understand its past. To that end, in part 1 of the book, I chart the history of the internet, focusing on the two most recent eras from the early 1990s through today. In part 2, I dive deeper into blockchains, explaining how they work and why they matter. I show how blockchains and tokens can be used to construct blockchain networks, and explain the technical and economic mechanisms by which they work. In part 3, I show how blockchain networks empower users and other network participants, answering the "why blockchains?" question people often ask. In part 4, I address controversial questions head-on, including policy and regulatory topics and the harmful casino culture that has developed around blockchains that hurts their public perception and undermines their potential. Finally, in part 5, building on the history and concepts presented earlier, I go deeper into intersecting areas like social networks, video games, virtual worlds, media businesses, collaborative creation, finance, and artificial intelligence. I hope to give a flavor for the power of blockchain networks, and how they can underpin better versions of existing applications along with new applications that weren't possible before.

## Part One: Read. Write.

### 1. Why Networks Matter

> It makes sense that network effects would dominate the internet, the ultimate network of networks. People cluster around other people. Services such as Twitter, Instagram, and TikTok are valuable because hundreds of millions of people use them. The same is true of many networks that make up the internet. The more people exchange ideas on the web, the richer that information network. The more people message over email and WhatsApp, the more relevant these communication networks. The more people conduct business across Venmo, Square, Uber, and Amazon, the more valuable these marketplaces. As a rule: more people, more value. Network effects take small advantages and snowball them into avalanches. When corporations are in control, they tend to guard their advantages jealously, making it difficult for anyone to leave. If you build an audience on a corporate network, leaving means forfeiting your audience, so you're discouraged from doing so. This partly explains why power has consolidated into the hands of a few large tech companies. If this trend continues, the internet could end up even more centralized, commandeered by powerful intermediaries that use their might to crowd out innovation and creativity. Left unchecked, this will lead to economic stasis, homogeneity, unproductivity, and inequality. Some policymakers seek to defang the largest internet companies with regulation. Their remedies include blocking acquisition attempts and proposing to split companies into parts. Other regulatory proposals require companies to interoperate, allowing easy integrations between networks. Users could then bring their connections wherever they like, and they could read and post content across networks according to their preferences. Some of these proposals could rein in incumbents and make room for competitors, but the best long-term solution is to build new networks from the ground up that won't lead to concentrations of power for the simple reason that they can't.

### 2. Protocol Networks

> The key design decision in DNS is that users, not a company or other higher authority, own and control their names. Specifically, users control the mapping between their names and IP addresses. They can therefore move their names from one computer to another, at any time for any reason, and run whatever software they want, without losing their network connections or anything else they've built. Let's say I host cdixon.org at Amazon's web hosting services. Imagine that Amazon decides to charge me more money, throttle my website, censor my content, or do something else I don't like. I can simply transfer my files to another provider and redirect the cdixon.org DNS record. I could even choose to self-host, the digital equivalent of living off the grid. When I redirect my name, all my network connections remain intact. People can still send me emails and the inbound web links that search engines use to rank my site still work. The switch to a new hosting provider happens behind the scenes. It is invisible to other participants on the network. Amazon knows this and knows it must therefore act within the guardrails of network norms and market forces, or risk losing customers. This simple design decision—giving users full control of their names—keeps businesses honest. It restrains Amazon and other companies, forcing them to offer competitive services at competitive prices. Companies can still avail themselves of traditional business moats like economies of scale (the more servers they run, the lower their costs, the higher their margins), but they can't rely on network effects to trap users the way centralized networks do.

> Contrast how DNS works with what happens when you try to leave a service like Twitter or Facebook. Most corporate networks have a "download your data and delete your account" feature. You get records of your posts and maybe of your followers and friends. But you lose your network connections and your audience because those people followed your Twitter or Facebook account, and you can't redirect that account to a new service. You don't control the mapping. You can get the data, but you lose your network. These "data download" features are feints. They gesture toward openness and freedom, but they do nothing to increase user choices. The company has total control. Your only choice is to stay, or leave and start from scratch somewhere else.

> There are two main reasons why RSS lost. First: features. RSS couldn't match the ease of use and advanced functionality of corporate networks. On Twitter, a user could sign up, choose a name and accounts to follow, and be up and running all in a few clicks. RSS was, by contrast, simply a set of standards. No company was behind it, and therefore no one ran a centralized database to store things like people's names and lists of followers. The products built around RSS had more limited features, lacking user-friendly mechanisms for content discovery, curation, and analytics. RSS expected too much from users. Like email and the web, the protocol used DNS for naming, but that meant content creators had to pay to register domains and then transfer those domains to their own web servers or RSS hosting providers. This onboarding experience was fine for email and the web back in the early days of the internet, when there were no alternatives and when many users were technologists who were accustomed to putting in the effort. But as people with less willingness and know-how came online, RSS couldn't compete. Free, streamlined services like Twitter and Facebook offered easier ways for people to publish, connect, and consume, enabling them to amass tens, then hundreds of millions—and in Facebook's case, billions—of users.

> This gets at the second reason RSS lost: funding. For-profit companies can raise venture capital to hire more developers, build advanced functionality, subsidize hosting costs, and so forth. As they grow, more capital becomes available. Companies like Facebook and Twitter, and almost every other large corporate network, have raised billions of dollars from private and public investors. RSS was just a loosely connected group of developers with no access to capital beyond voluntary donations.

### 3. Corporate Networks

> Network effects complicate the competition between corporate network complements by setting up incentives that are in conflict. On the one hand, a corporate network's complements help grow the network and strengthen its network effect. On the other hand, a corporate network's complements can siphon away revenue that might otherwise have gone to the network owner. The tension between these goals almost always causes the relationship between corporate networks and their complements to snap.

> Opacity is another downside of corporate networks. People lose trust when functions like algorithmic rankings, spam filtering, deplatforming, and other decisions are managed inside a black box by for-profit entities. Not sure why your account got suspended? Or why your app was rejected from an app store? Or why you no longer seem to have as much social clout as you once did? Corporate networks have become critical tools affecting people's lives, and they are constant subjects of debate and frustration. Management might change, sometimes sharing your values and other times not. Again, the real problem is the model. Everyone is at the whim of corporate platforms.

## Part Two: Own.

### 4. Blockchains

> A state machine is the purest way to think about a computer. Nakamoto's blockchain is not a physical computer, like a PC, laptop, phone, or server. It is a virtual computer—meaning it is a computer in function, not in conventional physical embodiment. Blockchains are a software abstraction that overlay on top of physical devices. They're state machines.

> The addition of advanced programming languages to blockchains is a major breakthrough. It's analogous to Apple's introducing an app store to the iPhone (except where mobile app stores are curated, blockchains are open and permissionless). Any developer in the world can write and run apps, ranging from marketplaces to metaverses, on blockchains like Ethereum. This is a very powerful property that makes blockchains far more expressive and versatile than an accountant's notebook. This is why it's wrong to think of blockchains as mere ledgers for tabulating numbers. Blockchains are not databases; they're full-fledged computers.

> Critics who fail to appreciate the power of blockchains tend to have different priorities. Many people, including lots of workers within Big Tech companies, care about improving computers along familiar dimensions, such as memory and computing power. They see blockchains' abilities as constraints—as weaknesses rather than strengths. It's hard for people accustomed to free rein to appreciate that computers could improve on a dimension that is designed, in part, to undermine their authority.

*Note: I want him to interact with the criticisms more. This feels like he's just blowing them off and saying critics were wrong in the past so they still surely be wrong again*

### 5. Tokens

> With NFTs, each token is unique, in the same way many objects in the physical world are unique. I have a set of books—different titles, different authors—on my bookshelf that are distinct and, despite all being books, are not interchangeable with one another. These are non-fungible. Fungible tokens have many uses,

## Part Three: A New Era

### 8. Take Rates

> One critique of blockchain networks is that their low take rates might be temporary: as blockchain networks proliferate, new intermediaries will pop up that raise the take rates, skeptics say. Moxie Marlinspike, a respected security researcher and founder of the Signal messaging app, wrote a widely read blog post arguing that because users are averse to even tiny user-interface frictions, they will end up clustering around easy-to-use front-end applications that siphon users away from blockchains. If these applications are run by companies, then we end up with the same problem we have today: a few companies with strong pricing power in control. This is an insightful critique, sometimes known as the risk of recentralization. A similar dynamic undermined RSS, as discussed in "The Fall of RSS." Twitter and other corporate networks siphoned users away from the protocol by offering lower-friction user experiences. This dynamic is also a risk for poorly designed blockchain networks. Blockchain networks can avoid this fate if they can guarantee that users retain the credible threat of switching front-end clients even if users cluster around a few popular ones. To ensure this, the network must be designed to include the following: ■ Low-friction user experiences that match those of modern corporate networks. This is why blockchain networks need a mechanism for funding much of what corporate networks fund, including ongoing software development and user subsidies like free hosting and name registration. Protocol networks never had a sufficient funding mechanism, a key reason RSS failed. (See "Building Networks with Token Incentives" for more on blockchain funding mechanisms.) ■ Network effects that accrue to community-controlled blockchains rather than to company-controlled front-end applications. This means the things users care about—their names, social relationships, and digital goods—need to be blockchain-based and user owned. Applications are unable to acquire pricing leverage if users can easily switch from one application to another. When users own what matters, lock-in is much less likely.

### 11. Network Governance

> Federated networks have two main weaknesses, though. The first is friction. The impediments are due mainly to the boundaries between servers that are running independently. For example, searching for content and interacting with users across servers can be cumbersome because there is no central data repository. One server might store a user's post, and another server might store a reply to that post, but no central servers store the entire thread. This makes it difficult to provide a global view of what is happening across the network. Because of their architecture, federated networks have difficulty matching the smooth user experiences of other networks. Corporate networks eliminate friction by storing data in centralized data centers while blockchain networks eliminate friction by storing data on a blockchain. (Recall that blockchains are distributed, virtual computers that can store arbitrary information, including social data.) Federated networks, like protocol networks, have no centralized components, and thus no central place to store data, which is a problem because, as history shows, even small amounts of friction can stymie adoption. How might one fix this? Imagine another system on top of a federated network that collects data from the individual servers and aggregates that data into a single, centralized database. Sometimes servers will disagree, so the system needs a way to adjudicate disputes to decide which servers best represent the network's true state. Well, guess what? We've just invented a blockchain. Blockchains provide a mechanism for centralizing data while keeping control of that data decentralized.

*Note: Health data feels like a federated network*

> The second weakness of federated networks is the risk of protocol coups. That is, even if a federated network succeeds, it may spawn a new corporate network and thereby re-create the same problems discussed throughout this book. As mentioned, federated networks are like a federation of countries. They have common rules but they still have cross-border frictions. Users tend to cluster in the most popular country (read: server), which gives that country's ruler (read: server owner) effectively unlimited authority to set and change rules.
