# Highlights — Risky Business

## Prologue: Overlooked No More

> The kicker: insurance often can't do its job right—that's where our book enters the story. Without giving away too much of the plot, there is a feature of all insurance products that accounts for much of what makes insurance markets full of puzzles, frustrations, and—dare we say—intrigue. It is known as the problem of selection, and it is the focus of our book. Insurance sellers care not just about how much they sell but whom they are selling to. They care, in other words, about which customers they select. And why do they care? Because some customers are much more expensive to insure than others.

> The problem of selection introduces a two-sided game of cat-and-mouse in which insurers try to pick the right customers (and avoid the wrong ones), while the "wrong" types of customers do all they can to get insurers to believe they're actually the right ones.

## Part I: Setting the Scene

### Chapter 1: Death of a Market

> The AAirpass was turning into an expensive proposition. So American did what you might expect and raised the price to cover its—ahem—sky-high costs. By 1990, the AAirpass price had gone from $250,000 to $600,000. That only made the problem worse. Now only those who were truly committed to an airborne existence were willing to shell out for the pass, and the cost to American of serving the customers who were still interested in AAirpass rose faster than its price. The price topped a million dollars just three years later; by 1994, American cut its losses and canceled the program. American learned the hard way that the customers who are willing to pay the most are sometimes the ones you want the least.

> You may not shed any tears for American Airlines' shareholders who lost money off this debacle or care much that AAirpass folded after a decade-long run of losses. But it is just one example of a much larger problem, one that afflicts any market in which sellers care not just about how much they sell but also about whom they are selling to. We call these selection markets, because sellers care about which customers select their products.

> Insurance markets suffer from the same problems as AAirpass, all-you-can-eat restaurant deals, and credit cards—there are more expensive customers and less expensive customers, and all too often the more expensive customers are the ones who actually buy.

> In selection markets, some customers are more expensive to sell to than others. The selection problem, as we'll see, occurs when the costly-to-serve customers know who they are but the seller doesn't.

> Insurance markets—which are what we'll focus on—are a prime example of selection markets, and one that looms particularly large in the economy and in public policy. Insurance companies naturally care about who their customers are—an accident-prone driver or homeowner is going to be more expensive to cover than their more cautious counterpart. Insurance customers often know things about themselves that are relevant to the costs of insuring them. The insurance company may not know about these traits and can't easily learn them—like how frequently the customer gets distracted while driving or whether they tend to leave pots cooking unattended on the stove.

> Perhaps you're tempted to think that it's not a big deal if people choose not to buy high-priced insurance. We choose not to buy expensive things all the time. None of us owns a Porsche. They're way too expensive. That's not a sign that a market is failing. It's a sign that it's really expensive for Volkswagen to build each Porsche. The resulting "market clearing" price is such that enough other customers are willing to pay for the number of cars Volkswagen makes, but not us: the value we'd get from driving a fancy sports car is less (far, far less, in fact) than the price we'd have to pay for one. This same Porsche logic might lead you to think that the customers deterred from buying insurance coverage because of high prices are the ones who value insurance the least.

> That wouldn't be the right way to think about insurance. Because the role of insurance is to be a buffer against the vagaries of fate. And those vagaries, when they occur, can be just as catastrophic for the low risk as the high risk. Even the healthiest and most prudent among us can end up with astronomical hospital bills owing to random, uncontrollable twists of genetic fate, or five-figure home-repair expenses due to equally random acts of God. As Wirecutter concludes in its guide to pet insurance, "[Even] if you never have to make a claim, your premiums weren't wasted—they were the cost of predictability, and of sleeping easier with a pet at your feet."

> It's not a problem if some drivers are more accident prone than others—as long as the insurer knows what the customer knows. If the insurer knows that teenage boys are higher-risk drivers than middle-aged moms are (and who doesn't?), it can set prices for each accordingly. The problem, as we'll see in this book, arises when customers have information that their insurers don't have about how expensive they are to cover.

### Chapter 2: Into the Wild

> Thus far, we've provided only a single example of selection-driven all-out collapse of an insurance market: the highly unusual confluence of circumstances that made it impossible for residents of West Hollywood to get health insurance at the onset of the AIDS epidemic. We can see that selection killed the market because the market had existed before the AIDS epidemic hit, then it didn't.

> Perhaps Mr. Sterling should have read the comments section of the last time Lieber had written about the unemployment insurance business, back in 2009. He would have come across Jackson of Boston, who observed, "I looked high and lo for this kind of insurance 6 months before I was laid off because I could smell the blood in the water having worked at this particular firm for 8 years"; or the Reddit user who, around the same time that Sterling was interviewed in the Times, posted a query asking about whether anyone had had any experience with IncomeAssure—because the user, Relaxed_Meat, was very, very interested in buying, given that his company was in the process of moving its operations to other regions. Two years later, SterlingRisk shut down IncomeAssure. It turned out it was too good to be true.

> Why would it be helpful if divorce insurance did exist? Because however blissful a couple might be on their wedding day, people and circumstances change. Some unions will last, and some will end in acrimony. And when a marriage comes to an acrimonious (or even amicable) conclusion, divorce can be really, really expensive. While the basic cost of legally erasing a marriage is modest (a few hundred dollars tops, in most states), once the lawyers get involved—as they unfortunately often do—the average cost can rise to over $15,000.

> We looked at some of the products Wedlock offered, and it was easy to see why. The prices were exorbitant. Let's take a sample policy that required a couple to pay a little over $1,900 per year in premiums. That level of coverage would provide up to $12,500 to cover the cost of a divorce in four years' time. The maximum payout from the policy would increase by $2,500 for each year a couple stayed together. So, for example, if a couple divorced after ten years of paying premiums, they'd get $27,500, more than enough to pay lawyers in even a relatively expensive separation. But they also would have paid in ten years' worth of premiums, which adds up to around $19,000 in total.

> And why did Logan choose to set the price so high? Presumably because, when he'd run the numbers, he did it understanding full well that the customers he'd attract would be couples with the highest risk of divorce. If he'd cut his prices, the numbers would no longer "check out."

> In Wedlock's case, the price was so high that the product couldn't survive. In other cases, selection can lead to outrageously high prices without driving the market entirely out of existence. The runner-up in our Twitter poll of missing insurance products was pet coverage, which, going back just a few years, was largely nonexistent because it was assumed that the market would collapse under the weight of hidden information. Recently, though, that's changed. Now pet owners can buy health insurance—but at very high prices and not for all pets.

> As we've already observed, part of the answer is how much one side knows relative to the other. If newlyweds and insurers are completely in the dark about a marriage's prospects, that's okay. It's also just fine if both look into the same (slightly imperfect) crystal ball. It's even okay if buyers know just a little more than sellers. Then there'll be a correspondingly little bit of selection—prices are higher than they'd be if both sides were on an equal (informational) footing, but they don't rise so much that they set off a death spiral. Trade is sustained because, despite selection, insurance is valuable peace of mind.

> You can think of an insurance market's survival as a struggle between the forces of a buyer's private information, which will drive it to destruction, and customer value, which can help it soldier on despite the selection problems that private information creates. As the first of these gets ratcheted up, prices are more apt to rise, and the market edges closer to total collapse; greater customer value, on the other hand, can keep even some of the "good customers" (those with lower costs) from dropping out and help the market survive.

> In cases in which the market falls apart or fails to materialize in the first place—like divorce coverage or insurance for elderly dachshunds—the weight of buyer knowledge is such that no amount of customer value can keep the market alive. In situations where the market can survive—like pet insurance for younger pups—selection still leaves its mark. It drives up prices and drives down the quality of coverage.

> It turns out that it isn't just Ray. When contracts allow it, lots of other people also think to upgrade their dental coverage when costly treatments are in their near future. And given that everyone's doing it (or would if they could), insurers have for the most part decided that it just isn't worth it to offer "real" insurance. This leaves us all worse off relative to a world in which we could find a way around selection problems—people who are unlucky enough to have bad teeth bear the cost of financially ruinous dental expenses on their own, and insurers miss out on making money from managing this "bad teeth" risk on their customers' behalf.

*Note: Instead of insurance, maybe a better product here is financing.*

> When Harvard raised the price employees had to pay for the more generous plan, fewer people bought it. And just as the economics of selection predicts, the employees who dropped out of the plan were different from the ones who chose to maintain their more generous coverage at the higher price. Employees who switched to the less generous alternative were those who tended to use the least amount of health care, while the ones who stayed in the more generous plan even at the much higher price tended to use a lot of health care. They were also older—four years older on average—so that they could reasonably expect higher health costs going forward.

> By now, you can hopefully guess how the story goes. Although the price employees had to pay for the more generous plan went up, so too did its (per-enrollee) costs. As a result, Harvard found itself back in the same bind the following year. Harvard raised prices further the next year, with the same consequences. And round and round they went, as Harvard chose to play out the death spiral to its bitter conclusion: higher prices scared off the healthiest, lowest cost of the remaining enrollees, requiring yet more price hikes. Eventually, Harvard cut its losses and ceased to offer the more generous plan.

> Personalized genetic information is but one example of the type of secrets customers may hold, which insurers could uncover if only they asked. And it isn't limited to Huntington's—one can test for genes associated with breast cancer, colon cancer, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease, among others. Genetic testing surely isn't the only source of customers' information advantage. It's just one that is really, really easy for us—and them—to see.

### Chapter 3: The Two-Thousand-Year-Old Market

> Another reason why few people buy privately sold annuities is that they already have annuities, whether they like it (or even know it) or not. If your employer offers a defined-benefit pension plan, it means that, once you retire, you'll receive a fixed amount of money each year till you die. That is, you've effectively been given an annuity. Every American—no matter who their employer is—has an annuity provided by the government. Social Security provides everyone with an annuity, even if it isn't usually described in those terms. You might think that private annuities are rare because they're already provided in part by employers and the government. Or it might be the reverse: employers and the government have stepped in to provide annuities because the private annuity market just doesn't work very well. And why doesn't the private market work as it should? Precisely because selection leads to annuity prices that are so high that average retirees aren't interested in buying them.

## Part II: Much Ado About Selection

### Chapter 4: The Price Isn't Right

> In this chapter, we'll focus on whether insurers are able to get the price "right." If only insurers had some way of recognizing which customers are likely to have more accidents than others. Then they could set their insurance rates accordingly, and everyone could buy the insurance they want, at prices that reflect their chances of getting into an accident.

> We'll explore what this means in practice—the kinds of information insurance companies collect and how this can help reduce selection. But at the same time, we'll see the limitations to this approach: some types of information are very hard to collect, and sometimes insurers decide that it'd be bad business to use all the information they have at their disposal in forecasting customers' costs, even if it means that their prices aren't quite right as a result.

> The genius of the coffeehouse entrepreneur Edward Lloyd was to foster the active exchange of such information among the sea merchants and insurers who frequented his establishment. Much of the information about which captain was a drunkard and where pirates lurked on the open ocean most likely came from the customers themselves. Mr. Lloyd made his particular coffeehouse indispensable by gathering information himself; he employed runners who went along the docks picking up all the latest shipping news and developed a network of paid informants who sent him gossip from other ports. As information came in, it was announced from a pulpit that Lloyd had installed at one end of the coffeehouse.

> You might imagine that by the time the auto insurer has sleuthed out all these details about your past and fed the relevant information into its proprietary algorithm, the company may have as good an idea of your likely auto insurance claims as you yourself do, maybe even better. Yay for Big Data and the end of selection-driven failures in insurance markets? Not so fast. Researchers have found ample evidence of adverse selection in automobile insurance markets, despite the pages of data entry and background checks. One study in Israel found a much higher rate of automobile accidents among experienced drivers who purchased more automobile insurance coverage compared to otherwise-similar drivers who faced the same price but chose less generous coverage.

> The study of the Israeli automobile insurance market found that, while average claims were about a third higher among experienced drivers who chose more generous coverage than those who chose less generous, that gap narrowed by about 90 percent once the researchers adjusted for all of the information about the driver and their car that the insurer collected. That is, by some measure, the detailed data and advanced pricing algorithms get rid of most selection. Yet some selection remains—even for people with identical past driving records, reckless drivers who know they were just lucky not to have had even a minor accident buy more coverage, and careful drivers who know they were unlucky buy less.

> Why not instead offer coverage at a very high price that reflects those customers' expected future costs? Instead, they can't buy insurance at all. At any price. That's puzzling, because it really shouldn't be so hard to calculate the future medical expenses of cancer patients and stroke victims and set their insurance premiums accordingly. It turns out that this thorniest of selection problems would require a view into a prospective customer's soul, not simply a copy of their hospital records.

> Hendren argues that despite all the information that life insurers collect, people suffering from certain health conditions know something about their future costs that insurers simply can never discern from medical histories or physical exams. As a result, not only are they a lot more expensive to care for, but they also know a lot more about what their cost of care is likely to be in the future. And it's this inside information that makes the market for covering preexisting conditions break down.

> Today, we can't so easily explain away the lack of per-mile insurance. It's now feasible to install an onboard tracker that plugs into your car's computer and can capture not just how far you've traveled but also when and where and how carefully you drive. (The onboard trackers presumably help both by improving selection—higher prices for frequent drivers and ones that have to commute during rush hour—and by disciplining bad behavior.)

> We're still waiting for the great disruption. As of 2018, usage-based insurance had a 5 percent share of the U.S. market—much higher than the near-zero share it had just a decade or so before but well short of dominating the marketplace. Online commentary suggests that part of the reason may be that this type of insurance can lead to higher rates even if you're not that bad a driver. If the rate-setting algorithm ends up raising rates for better drivers—or even if people simply believe this is a possibility—some good drivers might stay away. That is, maybe Big Data isn't as smart as we thought it was.

> But what is important for our purposes is that—whatever we or you believe is fair—people simply hate the idea that businesses charge different prices for exactly the same thing. Amazon once—and only once—tried to charge different prices on the same DVD titles back in 2000. Customers noticed and were sufficiently outraged that the experiment was abandoned within three days. CEO Jeff Bezos later called the company's foray into personalized pricing "a mistake."

> It's indicative, we suspect, of why we see less personalized pricing—insurance or otherwise—than you might expect, given the ever more intimate details of our habits and preferences that companies glean from web-browsing behavior, cell-phone tracking, and data we often freely provide to any online vendor that asks.

### Chapter 5: Opening the Chamber of Secrets

> This chapter is about some of the ways that insurance companies can get customers to reveal their secrets, once they've collected all the information about the customer that they can. As we emphasized in chapter 4, getting better information isn't a panacea—even after insurance companies have found out all that they possibly (and legally) can, they often still can't fully distinguish the sick from the healthy and the careful from the reckless. In such cases, they need to get customers to sort themselves. They don't fake fires, but they do have the selection-market equivalent: designing insurance policies to appeal to the customers they want (the secretly low-cost customers) and to repel the ones they don't (the secretly high-cost ones).

> Why not offer insurance that's bundled with something that customers see as a free benefit rather than an extra cost to be endured? One that might be appreciated by all but particularly by the low-cost customer you're trying to attract? This is why some health insurers offer to throw in free (or subsidized) gym membership along with your health insurance policy. What is clear is that these types of benefits can be a way for an insurer to attract and retain the good customers.

> The authors' results do raise the possibility that employers might design various inducements to attract healthier employees rather than to help their employees to be their healthiest selves. It certainly suggests another angle to the fabled on-site massages and Kombucha-on-tap that deep-pocketed Silicon Valley firms use to attract coddled millennial software engineers (with healthy lifestyles); they seem designed to appeal most to employees who will take the fewest sick days and have the lowest chance of needing medical care.

> Cabral found that with the two-year contracts, there was less of the type of pernicious selection described earlier. You might be able to delay that root canal or implant by a couple of months to allow for more generous dental coverage to kick in. But it'd be ill advised if instead the wait were a couple of years. She estimates that, if the company didn't subsidize dental coverage and contracts were annual, the market for more generous coverage would unravel almost completely. But if the contract length increased to two years, there would be fewer problems of employees enrolling only when they already knew they needed dental work. By Cabral's calculations, the price drop would be enough to more than double enrollment. She predicts enrollment of nearly 40 percent if employees were locked into five-year plans.

*Note: Makes me think about Obamacare. We should force everyone to buy healthcare through the exchanges and let employers subsidize your healthcare pre-tax like normal. Then you could pick your insurance however you want and insurers could offer multi-year contracts.*

## Part III: Enter the Government

### Chapter 6: Eat Your Broccoli!

> The problem with a minimalist mandate like Florida's is if the minimum requirement is set too low, it's as if there's no mandate at all. You can end up with selection problems for the optional add-ons that are purchased mainly by higher-cost enrollees. In other words, if the point of the mandate is to solve the adverse-selection problem but the mandate requirement is minimal, the proverbial can has just been kicked down the road—the selection problem is merely shifted to the market for meaningful (i.e., more than the mandated minimum) insurance.

### Chapter 7: You Can't Do That!

> From the perspective of selection markets, this seems completely backward. In chapter 6, we described the considerable policy effort and attention the government devotes to trying to combat adverse selection through mandates and subsidies. Then it just turns around and with the other hand creates private information by legislating secrets into existence! What gives?

> There's a clear case to be made for these laws on the grounds of fairness. It seems unfair to reward those who already won the genetic lottery with lower life and health insurance premiums: Why should those who were born into genetic misfortune be further punished with extortionate prices for their health insurance coverage? But if, in the name of fairness, we decide to prohibit companies from "punishing" people for bad luck or exacerbating inequities with their price-setting decisions, we take away a key instrument that insurers have for dealing with selection. We live in what may be a more just world but create selection problems in the process. Everything involves trade-offs.

> This is the balance of equality and efficiency that the Medicare program's architects have settled on: everyone is treated equally at initial enrollment, but six months after that, the market gets to decide who gets what and for how much. Overall, this policy creates selection problems with initial coverage choices, since when everyone is treated equally by the insurers, you can bet that people don't all respond equally. Indeed, healthy individuals tend to avoid the Medicare-plus-Medigap option and flock to the Medicare Advantage plans dangling those gym memberships and other perks. But after this initial period, the pendulum swings away from equity; insurers are free to use whatever information they can uncover to decide who gets to be their customer and at what price.

### Chapter 8: Business Gets the Last Move

> Anyone charged with making and enforcing a set of rules is familiar with the action-reaction problem confronting DeFriest's jailers. This includes the rule setters in government who endeavor to set public policy to address problems created by adverse selection. But the story rarely ends with the passage of a single rule. Indeed, the story never really ends at all, because insurers, like DeFriest, always respond to whatever set of shackles—literal or regulatory—constrains them. Insurers will always look to figure out how they can work within the new rules to keep on attracting the cheapest possible customers.

*Note: Same with taxes. It requires constant maintenance.*

> At the other extreme, sometimes changes in medicine mean that certain diagnoses become a real bargain to insurers. For example, high cholesterol was an expensive diagnosis for many elderly Americans in the early 2000s, in large part because of one expensive drug, Zetia. As a result, when the prescription-drug program began, Medicare set payments to insurers substantially higher for customers with cholesterol problems. But shortly thereafter, the drug's patent expired, and its generic, simvastatin, quickly appeared on the market, drastically reducing the cost of cholesterol treatment. This made high cholesterol an extremely desirable diagnosis (from the insurer's perspective). In 2009, the government was paying insurers an extra $207 for covering an enrollee with a diagnosis of hypertension, even though the extra cost from a hypertensive customer was less than $150.

> At the same time, the possible consequences of adverse selection can be hard to fully grasp—that's why it's taken us centuries to come to understand them better, and we're still a ways off from reaching complete enlightenment. If policy makers continue to make missteps and, we hope, learn from their mistakes—as with the initial design of Medicare Advantage—adverse selection will continue to provide us and other researchers with policies to study and postmortems to offer on what worked and what didn't. Next time you're inclined to criticize government officials for their ineptitude, remember that they're trying to solve hard problems and confront many trade-offs. Put yourself in their shoes and ask if you could really do better.

*Note: This gives me an idea. So the hard part is predicting which customer will be higher cost, right? Well, can we hedge that risk? Like use a prediction market to predict which customers will have high costs. Then the company could offload the risk by participating in the market.*

## Epilogue: Selection Markets Here, There, and Everywhere

> But there is a much wider set of markets that are vulnerable to selection. We'd like to whet your appetite for our sequel, Riskier Business (should we ever get around to writing it), or at least make you appreciate the ubiquity of the economic concepts that are the foundation of our book. Because once you think about the features that make a selection market a selection market, you realize they are everywhere.

> More importantly from the perspective of the market for ISAs, when Hendren and Herbst incorporated students' forecasts into their prediction model, they found that it makes the model substantially better at predicting actual incomes. That is, there is information in students' knowledge of their futures that isn't captured by their GPA, major, family background, and so forth. Hendren and Herbst concluded that this private information—and the resultant selection problem—is sufficiently important that ISAs would have a hard time breaking even. Selection messes with this potential win-win, destroying a market that might have otherwise helped lower-income students access a college education. They calculated that, given the extent of private information, ISAs would have to have markups of more than 60 percent over the average college grad's expected income to avoid losing money.

> And lenders put a lot of effort into collecting data to predict default. Collectively, these are captured in a credit score. Yet even armed with credit scores and other predictors of default, private information remains in the hands of borrowers. That's one of the many findings from a remarkable study by Larry Ausubel, authored in collaboration with a large U.S. bank. The bank ran an experiment in which it randomly varied the terms offered to different prospective customers via credit card solicitations.

> The bank could compare, for a given offer, whether it was accepted by recipients with worse credit scores and other markers for default. The ones flagged as risky were indeed more likely to take up the credit card. This gap in creditworthiness between recipients accepting the offer and those ignoring it was at its worst when the advertised interest rate was particularly high—people with decent credit scores aren't interested in credit cards that offer horrible terms.
