# Why Nothing Works — Highlights

## Introduction

> But following the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge's opening in the late 1960s—the same time, as it happened, that Moses was stripped of his last remaining influence—the city had essentially stopped building new infrastructure. And that left me curious. What had changed? Why hadn't the globe's second most heavily trafficked transit hub been reimagined or redeveloped? Why had it been so easy for Moses to pursue bad projects when it was now so hard to complete good ones? The problem, I quickly concluded, wasn't a lack of vision. In the wake of Penn Station's demolition and Moses's subsequent dethroning, a range of powerful figures had championed various plans for restoration.

> Hoping to gain some perspective on the dynamics holding back progress, I began reading up on the project's history, building a spreadsheet that tracked all the erstwhile attempts to answer Moynihan's call to action. I began reaching out to people who had been involved in various schemes, many of which had been abandoned years, if not decades, earlier. I spent hours listening to frustrations narrated by disillusioned representatives of City Hall, of the state's economic development agency, of both the national railroad that owned the station (Amtrak) and the state-owned railroads that delivered commuter trains from New Jersey and Long Island, of Madison Square Garden executives, and of the megadevelopers hoping to erect skyscrapers in the surrounding neighborhood. I soon came to accept that everyone had a legitimate interest in the project—and most had good intentions. But they simply couldn't divine a way forward because not everyone's interests were aligned. I was surprised by my own conclusion. I'd suspected at the outset that some single roadblock was really culpable for the whole fiasco—that, for example, the Dolan family, which controls Madison Square Garden, was the fly in the ointment. But the truth turned out to be different: Nearly every player involved in the negotiation had something significant to lose if the redevelopment took any certain turn. And while nearly everyone was willing to show some flexibility in pursuit of the greater good, no one was willing to abandon their own interests too severely. The result was an impenetrable Rashomon, with everyone laying blame at the feet of some purportedly intractable partner. If only federal bureaucrats had approved more funding. If only Amtrak had been more flexible in scheduling track construction. If only the preservationists had approved demolishing a hidden wall. If only a peevish governor had exerted his leverage over the Dolans. If only the Dolans had relented. If only, if only, if only.

> A half century later, Penn Station was caught in the flip circumstance: Power had been so diffused that any minor objection would upend the whole thing. This wasn't a shift in personality—it was a transformation in the architecture of power itself.

> The chapters that follow argue that, for all the complaints, these frustrations aren't born for lack of what some term "political will." America still boasts its fair share of Robert Moses wannabes. Nor is it that conservatives have thwarted government by "starving the beast"—though that certainly hasn't helped. Rather, this book argues that progressivism itself has changed. Once committed to galvanizing experts to tackle big problems, the movement has more recently turned in the other direction. Having come to see how men like Moses were wielding public authority, progressives haven't just taken more frequently to "speaking truth to power." Rather, we've remade our governing agenda in its entirety. We've broadly abandoned efforts to draw power into the hands of power brokers and worked instead to diffuse authority—to push it down and out.

> This book makes three arguments. The first is that progressives have conned themselves into believing that they're focused on one thing when, in reality, the movement is broadly about something else.

> In essence, a movement that's purported to be bent on growing government appears, upon closer inspection, more driven to paring it back.

> That's not to argue that progressives aren't, in many instances, eager to expand public authority. Obamacare broadened Washington's mandate, and three of the Biden administration's biggest early achievements—the bipartisan infrastructure bill, the Inflation Reduction Act, and the CHIPS and Science Act—had the effect of expanding government's reach. But if those triumphs were each a big deal, they elicited less attention among progressives than questions of endemic racism, access to abortion, and immigrant rights. In short, the research suggested that the progressive head and the progressive heart are in different places. And that, I will argue, is for a hidden reason: progressivism can't be boiled down to one governing impulse—it's actually a strange and awkward amalgam of two.

> My argument here is that progressives operate with two separate pictures in their heads—two narratives that they hold simultaneously, often without even recognizing the distinction. The first of the two is framed by the misery born of chaos—a narrative steeped in our images of tenement-dwelling immigrants, of the "Okies" making their way west in John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath, of New Orleanians stranded after Katrina, of children starving in refugee camps, of polar bears trapped on melting icebergs. In the face of these privations, progressives rue the absence of authority—they long for a heroic figure equipped to save the day. Set amid various tragedies of the common, progressivism's first narrative dreams of pulling power up and into a node of authority equipped to make things better from above. A relief agency, a benevolent bureaucracy, a Herbert Hoover in Belgium, a Mother Teresa in Calcutta, an Admiral Thad Allen in Louisiana. The second narrative is born not from chaos but from tyranny. Centralized authority, in this frame, is less a salve than a menace. King George. The slave driver. The bureaucrat requiring a rape victim to bring her pregnancy to term. The cop with his knee on George Floyd's neck. Robert Moses. In these circumstances, the progressive impulse isn't to push authority up—it's "to speak truth to power," to cashier the tyrant and shield the victim.

> The second argument of this book, then, is that the two progressive narratives are suspended in a kind of yin and yang, an everlasting symbiosis that has ebbed and flowed through the decades. To be clear, at no time has progressivism been exclusively in the throes of either impulse; Jeffersonianism and Hamiltonianism have always existed side by side. [...] But the tension has always been there, and for progressivism to thrive, I will argue, the two impulses need to be in the right balance. And that's our fundamental problem today: the movement has listed too far in one direction.

> Most important, progressivism's cultural aversion to power has turned the Democratic Party—purportedly the "party of government"—into an institution drawn almost instinctively to cut government down. Progressives are so fearful of Establishment abuse that reformers tend to prefer tightening the grip on public authority to loosening the reins. The movement discounts whatever good government might do in service of ensuring it won't do bad. And as we'll see in the chapters that follow, that's driven well-intentioned reformers to insert so many checks into the System that government has been rendered incompetent.

> And the third, made so plainly evident by the catastrophe at Wollman Rink, is that the balance that's emerged since the late 1960s—the excessive tilt toward the Jeffersonian—is a seminal political liability for the progressive movement. Beyond conservatism, populism, MAGAism, and whatever other forces are pushing in contrary directions, progressivism is undermining itself. The cultural aversion to power hasn't just tied government in knots—it has diminished the movement's broader appeal. It is at the root of contemporary progressive exasperation.

> Following that prologue, each chapter tracks back to trace the chronological narrative. And while the topics vary dramatically, the basic arc remains the same throughout: public authority's potential is eventually undermined by the impulse to "speak truth to power."

## 1: Servant or Master of the Public?

> Perkins and those of his ideological ilk were skeptical of that diagnosis. They believed that any dream of returning the economy to the less efficient, smaller firms that had defined America's nineteenth-century economy was bound to fail. Perkins shared the radicals' concerns about the power wielded by the titans of industry—that's why he was a progressive. But he was less entranced with taking them down, and more inclined to building government up. To his mind, everyone would benefit if power was simply better coordinated in a scientific way—if, rather than a mess of competition, those with authority in both the private and public spheres acted in cooperative consultation.

*Note: This is what the Chinese do today*

## 2: The Price of Progress

> Beneath their good intentions, many progressives came to believe that, to put it indelicately, the general public was too stupid to be trusted with any real influence. And that wasn't simply born of prejudice—it reflected the country's newfound draw toward new sources of expert wisdom. Progressivism, in short, was being shaped by a cultural turn toward science. [...] Matters of state, in the progressive worldview, should not be left in the hands of charismatic country bumpkins; they should instead be placed in the responsible hands of professionals, of experts, of the well-heeled and well educated.

> The same zeitgeist framed progressivism's view of government. To the new progressive mindset, the hack country lawyers and freewheeling political bosses who had prevailed in the nineteenth century appeared amateurish, small-minded, and obsolete. Better for the nation that public business be handled by those who understood the unique challenges of public authority.

> Reformers might have been tempted, in the wake of the First New Deal's unraveling, to revert to their old Jeffersonian ideology. [...] But by the mid-1930s, many erstwhile champions of progressivism's aversion to bigness began to see the limitations of that approach. [...] It was at this point that a Yale Law School professor, Thurman Arnold, pointed to an alternative way forward: rather than managing the economy from above—treating economic actors as marionettes as the First New Deal had attempted to do—progressivism could seek to deploy government in a more adversarial role. Instead of assigning executive branch agencies the role of serving as economic maestros, this Second New Deal would deploy executive agencies as players themselves.

## 3: Bodies on the Machine

> However much Americans prized stability through the 1950s, progressivism's fear of chaos was eventually eclipsed by something else—cynicism. Municipal scandals, seemingly rampant through the Eisenhower years, nibbled away at the public's faith in city fathers. New Dealers who had presumed that dispassionate experts would sit atop the growing administrative state were horrified when Republicans installed political hacks in positions of vast responsibility.

*Note: Yep this is the problem. Power corrupts. Centralized power is not a stable equilibrium.*

> But for all his fury, Mumford didn't propose to end the highway program—he prescribed more and better planning, consolidating municipal authority into regional governments that would cut through the stew of parochial interests.

> To linger here for a minute, it's worth noting that the feature distinguishing the various elements of Lyndon Johnson's agenda was not the degree to which any individual thrust was more or less progressive. [...] Those who believed centralized power was a force for good were more likely to want to empower bureaucracy. Those who thought it inherently bad were more likely to want to burnish individual rights. Both impulses were fundamentally progressive, but the factors determining whether someone is more prone to embrace either approach at any given moment were often less ideological than they were cultural. That's the key to understand. The stories—the pictures in progressives' heads—are upstream of any policy. And during the 1960s, the predominant story was changing.

> The so-called credibility gap that separated military propaganda from reality became, for many boomers, a frame for understanding not just the Johnson administration but also institutions of power more generally. Nearly everything the government proclaimed would eventually become suspect. Establishment figures claimed to be accounting for the nation's long history of racism and prejudice—but were they actually in bed with the bigots? [...] The pattern was endemic. It wasn't just that the Establishment no longer deserved the benefit of the doubt; big government began to appear entirely unworthy of the public's trust.

## 4: Manacling the Octopus

> In 2021, the City of North Providence, Rhode Island, tried to fire Scott Feeley, a police sergeant charged with a whole rash of violations. [...] the LEOBOR tribunal empaneled to evaluate those charges found him guilty of seventy-nine of them. But the panelists decided, in the end, not to strip him of his badge, as the city demanded. Instead, he was simply demoted to patrolman after serving a forty-five-day suspension. [...] Chauvin, the officer eventually found guilty of murdering George Floyd, had previously been subject to twenty-two complaints and internal investigations as a Minneapolis police officer. Whatever his reputation for brutality, he'd remained on the force, protected in no small part by reforms often championed by progressives decades before.

> Written by Justice Harlan Fiske Stone and appended to the Supreme Court's 1938 Carolene Products decision [...] Stone was specifying areas where the court could take a more proactive role. [...] Quietly, this represented a watershed: by shedding the court's traditional role as a bulwark against the movement's Hamiltonian impulses, Stone was pointing the judiciary to become an agent for Jeffersonianism.

> The shift to depersonalization had profound impacts—and not entirely for the good. Recipients who once bristled at being patronized now lived in perpetual fear of a bureaucratic snafu. [...] Salt in the wound of poverty.

> What was perhaps most remarkable about the shift was the alacrity with which advocates went from ruing midnight raids to castigating the miserliness of the new impersonal regime. [...] A policy conceived before the 1960s, imbued with an explicitly Hamiltonian ethos, becomes the object of Jeffersonian ire. Well-intentioned reformers then begin to conceive of ways to push that centralized power down and out—to disrupt the Establishment's hold on its victims. In order to manacle the octopus, reformers work to endow the victims of the old regime with new rights. [...] Last, amid generalized frustration with the end result, government is made to appear generally, and specifically, incompetent. To wit, nearly every element of the story can be explained without incorporating the (generally nettlesome) influence of conservatism. Progressives serve at the forefront of every successive change. And yet there was no doubting who benefited politically from the change: the right.

> The problem was bigger than the financing. Public authorities were often taken to pursuing projects ordinary citizens abhorred even while neglecting improvements that the public might have deemed more worthwhile.

> In the decades that followed the 1960s, progressivism became a movement defined by the parks department unable to rebuild ice skating rinks, and the railroad unable to build a train station—a movement of social justice activists unable to act against brutal cops, of climate activists incapable of delivering clean energy, and of housing activists incapable of erecting new homes. By tipping the scales too far from Hamiltonianism, and too far toward Jeffersonianism, progressivism became, in short, a movement of do-gooders unable to do enough good. [...] Absent a progressivism that works, what reformers get is a progressivism left vulnerable to demagoguery. When government appears incompetent, voters turn to figures like Donald Trump.

## 5: More Harm Than Good

> The regulatory state, as it evolved, wasn't merely preventing an excess of competition from upending the economy, as Theodore Roosevelt and George Perkins had imagined a half century earlier. It was being used to weigh economic growth against other noneconomic interests. And it wasn't always clear that the experts making those determinations knew what they were doing. Borrowing from the broader theory of pluralism, many regulators appeared more driven to balance the interests of various constituencies than they were to champion the greater good.

> Worse, as the rhythms of the postwar regulatory state became more familiar, warring economic interests began to develop more nuanced understandings of how they could use regulation to their own advantage. [...] The regulatory state, conceived as an institution committed to the greater good, had become, in too many instances, a haven for free enterprise's losers.

> Trapped unwittingly between conservatism's vilification of government and their own skepticism of the Establishment, progressives alighted on what felt like a safe riposte to Reagan's excesses: open the government to more outside scrutiny. Force disclosure of what was being discussed along the corridors of power. Voice would be the magic bullet.

> It was, and is, easy to argue that the downsides of any given decision could have been avoided if everyone affected had been given sufficient voice. But the reality was, and is, that progress involves ratifying trade-offs that distribute burdens across communities, fair and unfair. And so a progressive agenda centered in almost every context on providing ordinary citizens with new tools to thwart that centralized authority [...] too frequently fails to answer a crucial question: Who, after everyone has spoken, should make the final choice?

> Voice has become a lightly shrouded proxy for gridlock. [...] But when voice turned to veto, and the choices were more muddled, the new regime made progress more complex, difficult, arduous, and tendentious to get things done. And that was, in the end, for one reason: rarely was anyone empowered to render a final decision.

> During the era of Robert Moses, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Richard Daley, Bull Connor, and the other imperious men of mid-twentieth-century America, it had been too easy for government power to be wielded against the public interest. [...] Now, by contrast, regulatory authority is so diffused that nearly anyone can upend even the most well-intentioned effort to do good. The protections, reforms, rights, and processes have combined, in too many cases, to make government incompetent.

## 6: No Place to Call Home

> So-called YIMBYs are often prone to embrace what amounts to a Jeffersonian approach, freeing the individuals who own given plots to build what they want regardless of local opposition. Their fight is to allow property owners to build granny flats above their garages as of right—that is, even if the neighbors object.

> That said, Jeffersonian efforts to address the nation's housing shortage have yet to prove a panacea. And that's for the same reason that previous efforts to bestow rights have, in certain ways, frustrated progressives. Pushing power down to a property owner sounds good. But when the "right" to build a multi-unit building on a parcel previously zoned for single-family homes runs up against the "right" to preserve a habitat for endangered species, or to ensure the sanctity of a local noise ordinance [...] a judge is required to resolve the conflict.

> There is, of course, an alternative. Progressives could seek to reestablish a planning mechanism that both allows for everyone to be heard (which Robert Moses never cared to do) and empowers some centralized authority to make expeditious final determination, after weighing various national, regional, community, and individual interests.

## 7: The Bridge to Nowhere

> At the turn of the twentieth century, the country's private-sector rail networks put the rest of the world to shame. In 1916, the country boasted more track than every other nation combined. But therein lay the problem. [...] And so progressives at the time, much to the derision of conservatives, set about crafting a plan to connect the isolated and forlorn corners of the country—the places where the railroads didn't run. In that spirit, progressives endeavored to have government build roads.

> No one who has read The Power Broker can reasonably argue for a return to the era when Hamiltonian dogma was left unchecked. But today's Jeffersonian predicament is an oppression of its own. [...] In the end, someone responsible to the greater good needs to be imbued with the discretion to point the way forward. A movement born in the late 1800s from a frustration that government couldn't deliver has spent the last half century correcting for the grievous errors of centralized authority. The correction has itself become oppressive. Now, the movement needs to come full circle.

## 8: A Tragedy of the Commons in Reverse

> The Sunrise Movement, a youth-oriented project whose tagline is "We are the climate revolution," mobilized to fight solar projects in Amherst, Massachusetts, for fear that new paneling might lead to deforestation. The Audubon Society sued to block wind farms in California.

> The problem, at root, isn't that these groups are mobilizing against phantom concerns—the costs born from renewable energy and transmission are real. [...] But if progressives might once have had faith that government officials could be trusted to weigh the pros and cons, Jeffersonianism's cultural aversion to power has denuded the system's capacity to make tough calls. The movement had very purposefully granted various countervailing concerns with what amounted to vetoes. And while each veto may serve to protect a worthwhile interest, piled together they almost inevitably foment paralysis.

## Conclusion: Full-Circle Progressivism

> Reformers began to realize that the bureaucracies born out of Herbert Croly's vision had become imperious to the point of being authentically tyrannical. Robert Moses wasn't some benevolent public figure by the end—he had morphed into a scourge. [...] Progressivism, born more than a century ago, has come full circle.

> But that's a risk progressives today need to take, a bargain they need to accept. A government too hamstrung to serve the public good will fuel future waves of conservative populism. Voters are drawn to figures like Donald Trump not because public authority is too pervasive, but because government can't deliver. His refrain claiming that the "deep state" has sold the ordinary citizen out—that insiders are constantly making "bad deals" on the nation's behalf—lands, in no small part, because voters have witnessed the incompetence firsthand. Lionizing government and then ensuring it fails is, in the end, among the worst of bad political strategies. The movement needs to change course not only because it's bad policy, but because it's bad politics as well.
