# Highlights — Stuck

Kindle highlights and notes from *Stuck: How the Privileged and the Propertied Broke the Engine of American Opportunity* by Yoni Appelbaum.

## Part I

### Chapter One: A Nation of Migrants

> Some Americans have become so accustomed to the places with the greatest opportunities being effectively reserved for the rich that it somehow seems natural that they should be. In fact, it represents a recent and profound inversion. For centuries, Americans at the bottom of the economic ladder moved toward such places, not away from them, searching for a foothold on the first rung of that ladder, looking for the chance to climb. Entrepreneurs raced to erect housing to hold them. Cambridge had long been a magnet for such people. The city had hardly run out of space; it hadn't even returned to the postwar peak of its population. And yet instead of drawing people in, Cambridge was now driving them out. And it wasn't alone. Throughout the country, the places where ordinary Americans were likeliest to find better jobs, earn higher incomes, and give their children better lives were increasingly priced beyond their grasp. Families were stressed. Cities were struggling. And the country was growing ever more unequal.

> Today, the problem I'm describing is generally referred to as our affordable housing crisis. But that's not quite right. If affordability were the underlying problem, then moving to places like Flint, Michigan—where housing is so cheap it can't be given away—would be the solution. Americans, though, are not beating a path to Flint, a city of few jobs and bleak prospects. What we actually face is a mobility crisis. The distinction matters. Americans used to be able to choose where to live, but moving toward opportunity is now, largely, a privilege of the economic elite.

> Together, these ideas constituted a new and transformative freedom. Instead of allowing communities to choose their own members, Americans decided to allow most individuals to choose their communities.

*Note: Is this true though? Hasn't America always been racist and exclusionary? It's just that before there's been so much land you could always move somewhere else and start a new community. Now the issue is that agglomeration effects mean the places with the best opportunities have the least room for new people. It's not that people don't have freedom to move anymore. It's that the opportunities and the returns for high opportunity locations are higher than ever and so those locations are very very crowded.*

> In the late nineteenth century, the heyday of American mobility, a third of all Americans might have changed addresses each year. In the 1940s and 1950s, about a fifth of Americans moved annually. By 2021, only one-twelfth of Americans moved. The drastic decline in geographic mobility is the single most important social change of the past half century, and perhaps the least remarked.

> But there is one more set of suspects, and the evidence for their guilt is damning: American mobility has been slowly strangled by generations of reformers, seeking to reassert control over their neighborhoods and their neighbors. At the beginning of the twentieth century, reformers sought to apply the fruits of science and reason to manage growth, reimposing order and control on a jumbled and chaotic landscape that mixed shops and apartments in among the houses, and occupants of varied ethnicities and income brackets. Their chosen tools were building codes and restrictive covenants and zoning ordinances, designed to segregate land by use and class and race. New Deal bureaucrats next took up the cause, requiring local jurisdictions to apply these tools to their communities and putting new construction firmly under the purview of government. Then, in the postwar decades, skepticism of big business and big government led a new generation of activists to empower individuals and groups to challenge decisions made by bureaucrats. This varied lot of reformers acted from a wide mix of motives, some laudable and others despicable. Some would probably appreciate what they have wrought, while others would be appalled at the unintended consequences of their work. But taken together, the reforms that they enacted have created a peculiarly dysfunctional system. Almost all new construction in the United States now requires government approval, and anyone with sufficient time and resources and education can effectively veto that approval, or at least impose great expense and delay. The result is that in the very places that need it most desperately, housing has become prohibitively difficult to build. If the freedom to move was originally secured by allowing Americans to choose their own communities, then it has been undone by a series of legal and political changes that restored the sovereignty of local communities and allowed them again to select their own members.

> For most of our history, a highly mobile population moved toward opportunity. When a place prospered, it quickly swelled with new arrivals. Builders rushed to meet the demand with housing. Farms gave way to clusters of houses, which turned into town houses, which sprouted into apartment buildings or even high-rises. But in today's burgeoning metropolises and boomtowns, restrictions have effectively frozen the built environment. As a result, housing has grown artificially scarce and prohibitively expensive. A fortunate few can still afford to move where they want. Most people, though, would have to pay so much more for housing in prospering cities that offered better jobs that relocation would leave them worse off overall. Americans aren't moving anymore, because for so many moving threatens to cost more than it delivers.

## Part II

### Chapter Five: Dirty Laundry

> The genius of the Modesto ordinance was that it provided a facially neutral rule, simply designating a district for the laundries, west of the tracks and south of G Street. There wasn't even a word for this sort of law, yet. Soon, it would be known as districting, and then as zoning. But by any name, it reflected a principle of immense power: control what can be done upon the land, and you control the prospects of the people who inhabit

### Chapter Six: Tenementophobia

> But if there was one cause that truly excited the passions of men like Bassett in those years, it was keeping their neighborhoods free from apartment buildings.

*Note: One feeling I have as I'm reading through. This book is trying to do two things at once: give me the back story and demonstrate why it is right. I feel though this isn't hitting. I already agree that the argument is right and so just want the back story without all the "convincing". On the other hand if someone doesn't agree with the argument I feel like they won't want the backstory at all. They'll just want why the argument is right.*

> twice as

> Zoning alone, in its early twentieth-century guise, was rarely enough to stop the movement of the population, or to jam the wheels of opportunity. But the 1920s brought a broad revolt against diversity as a series of federal laws sharply curtailed foreign immigration, a raft of new zoning laws attempted to do the same to domestic migration, and restrictive covenants spread as a means to exclude unwanted groups. Many Americans—particularly those who were white, educated, and affluent—wanted more control over their communities. They sought tools that they could use to defend their privilege and to keep their social inferiors someplace else. They drew on the New England tradition of autonomous towns functioning like members-only clubs, with the premium it placed on consensus and homogeneity. All would be well, they believed, if they could just keep everything and everyone in the proper place.

### Chapter Eight: The Housing Trap

> In 1933, the government created the Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) to refinance existing mortgages. In the 1920s, most primary mortgages were for short terms—loans of three to five years were common—and many required only interest payments. Lenders demanded down payments of up to half the property's value to insulate themselves from risk, and assumed appreciation would build further equity. In a highly mobile nation, few borrowers worried about paying off their loans. They assumed they would move before the loan expired, and if they stayed, they could always refinance for another few years. Plunging incomes and property values shattered this model. Borrowers went to bed with the imagined security of homeownership and woke up the next morning in a house now worth less than they owed, paying far more each month for the mortgage on their houses than their neighbors were paying to rent their own. Defaulting, previously unthinkable, became a rational response, and the bad loans threatened to demolish what was left of the banking sector. The HOLC aimed to solve this by making monthly mortgage payments as cheap as monthly rent, removing the incentive to default; for the same number of dollars they would have to pay to rent, people could own their homes. To pull that off, it stretched out the term of the loans to fifteen years, cut the interest rates, and required borrowers to pay down the principal. This strategy staved off default for some 80 percent of the loans it handled while putting owners on a path to paying off their debt entirely. The HOLC introduced another big change to the mortgage market. Congress worried that standard loans, which covered only half the present value of a house, might be too small. Someone who purchased a house for $6,000, for example, might try to refinance their $3,000 loan, only to discover that their house was now worth just $4,000. So it authorized the HOLC to lend up to 80 percent of the current value. The HOLC had simply set out to stabilize the housing market. But the key features of its refinancing program would help revolutionize it.

*Note: This is a big change and still hasn't been replicated worldwide.*

### Chapter Nine: A Plague of Localists

> Despite becoming sharply more likely to be living next to new neighbors, and to have moved to an unfamiliar place themselves, Americans expressed more trust in each other and more faith in institutions than they had during the immobile years of the Great Depression. Mobility again proved the wellspring of American community, mixing and recombining the population and stimulating the creation of fresh ties.
